---
title: Abbreviations
permalink: /Abbreviations/
---

<nowiki>g A : an Arata (a type of god) A+ : an Arata or higher (gods!)
A/c : the Arata of Code (a god, Nienor) A/j : the Arata of Justice (a
god) A/m : the Arata of Mobiles (a god, Frór) A/o : the Arata of Objects
(a god, also Frór) A/z : the Arata of Zones (a god, Sung) ABR : Ancient
Broken Road (a place) ads : ancient dwarven shield (an item) afaik : as
far as I know (an expression) afk : away from keyboard (an expression)
aka : also known as (an expression) arth : shield of Arthedain (an item)
asap : as soon as possible (an expression) atm : at the moment (an
expression) azure : an azure scroll (an item)

banded : a banded ring (an item) b4 : before (an expression) bbl : be
back later (an expression) BBT : Bill, Bert, and Tom (some mobs, the
place where they

`                                          stand)`

bc : because (an expression) BCS : Bree Central Square (a place which is
not

`                                          At the Sign of the Prancing Pony)`

bda : blackened dwarven axe (an item) bej : a bejewelled shield (an
item) bhc : black, hooded cloak (an item) bhb, bhsb : black horn short
bow (an item) black : a black scroll (an item) blue : a blue scroll (an
item) BM : Blue Mountains (a place) bms : a black metal staff (an item)
BN : Black Numenorean (a race of player) BOB : Breath of Briskness (a
spell) bplate : breastplate (an item) brb : be right back (an
expression) brd : black runed dagger (an item) brt : be right there (an
expression) bs : to backstab (an action) bs : broadsword (an item) bs :
bullsh\*\* (an expression) bsb : broad silver belt (an item) btw : by
the way (an expression) bw : bloodwight (a mob) bwb : brandywine bridge
(a place) bwf : black warg fur (an item)

cbf : cavebear fur (an item) CH : CryHavoc (an implementor) char : a
character (an expression) chief : Chief of Tharbad (a mob) chunk : chunk
of metal (an item) circlet : mithril circlet (an item) con :
constitution (a stat) copper : a copper ring (an item) crit : critical
(hit or cure crit) (a wound \[or spell\])

doa : darkened orkish axe (an item) db : dodging bonus (a stat) dbs :
dark broadsword (an item) dc : Dark Clump (a place) dex : dexterity (a
stat) dk : The Dead Knight (a mob) dmg : damage (an item stat) DT :
Death Trap (a type of place) DT : Dark Tower (a place) Dunadan : a
Dúnadan blade (or man race) (an item \[or race of men\])

ebs : engraved broadsword (an item) eket : a double edged eket (an item)
engr : engraved (an expression) emb : embellished longbow (an item) embr
: embroidered (an expression) eq : equipment (an expression) exp :
experience (an expression)

fang : a nasty, orkish fang (an item) fb : fireball (a spell) fgc :
forest green cloak (an item) filthy : Filthy Cave (a place) Fnost :
Fornost (a place) Ford : Ford in the River Bruinen (a place) FoY :
Fountain of Youth (a place) FR : The Fellowship of the Ring (one book of
the LoTR) ftw : for the win (an expression) fubar : f\*\*\*ed up beyond
all recognition (an expression) fyi : For Your Information (an
expression)

gbs : a great black scimitar (an item) gc : The ghostly captain (a mob)
gcm : grey cloaked man (a mob) GER : Great East Road (a place) GG :
Great Goblin (a mob) ggp : gotta go piss (an expression) GH : Grey
Havens (a city) gilded : a gilded rounded shield (an item) gleaming : a
gleaming belt/gleaming bs (items) glowsword : Artifact glowing
sword(sting etc..) (items) gm, gms : guildmaster (a mob) grey : a fine
grey cloak (an item) GW : Greenway (a place) Gway : Greenway (a place)

hardon(s) : hardened ranger(s) (a mob \[or mobs\]) hbm : a huge, black
mace (a weapon) hc : Hidden Camp (a place) heavy : thick/heavy armour
(usually) (items) hide : a smelly piece of worm hide (an item) HoB :
Hammer of Belegost (an item) HoME : The History of Middle Earth (Nine
books of C. Tolkien) horn : Elven call to arms in Rdell (an occurence)
hp, hps : hit point(s) (a stat) hsb : huge silvery bracer (an item)

IC : in character (an expression) IMHO : in my humble/honest opinion (an
expression) IMNSHO : in my not so humble opinion (an expression) IMO :
in my opinion (an expression) Imp : an Implementer (the highest gods...)
int : intelligence (a stat) iron : an iron ring (an item)

JRRT : J.R.R. Tolkien (the creator of Middle-Earth)

k : a thousand (unit of measurement, usually in xp)

LB : Last Bridge (a place) LB : lightning bolt (a spell) lev : level (an
expression) lmf : large metal full shield (an item) lmw : large metal
wall shield (an item) loc : locate (a spell) lol : laughs out loud (an
expression) lord : The wight-lord (a mob) LoTR : Lord of The Ring (a
book of J.R.R Tolkien) lvl : level (an expression) lww : large wooden
wall shield (an item)

M : a Maia (a type of god) MA : Master Assassin (a mob) Mb : a Maia
(Builder) (a type of god) Mc : a Maia (Cartographer) (a type of god) MD
: Michel Delving (a place) mda : a mighty dwarven axe (a weapon) meta :
a metamorph (a kind of player) mob : a mobile (a creature played by the
computer) mp, mps : movement point(s) (a stat) Ms : a Maia (Shaper) (a
type of god) Mw : a Maia (Wright) (a type of god) mw : metal wall shield
(an item) MU : Manwe Unit (an indefinite amount of time

`                                          that elapses until things get`
`                                          fixed around here)`

MUME : Multi-User in Middle-Earth (yes!)

nag, naggy: Nagrorh (a mob) necro : necromancer (a mob) nen : nenisul
bridge or area (a place) nm : never mind (an expression) noble(s) :
wight-noble(s) (a mob) noc : New Orc Caves (a place) nooc : New Old Orc
Caves (a place) npc : a non-player character (a mob played by the
computer) nuke : to obliterate with spells/hits(an expression)

ob : offensive bonus (a stat) obj : an object (synonym of item) OER :
The Old East Road (a place) OERBYR : Old East Road by a Rock (a place)
OER/GW : Old East Road Meets Greenway (a place) OiE : Ost-in-Edhil (a
place) omw : on my way (an expression) OOC : Old Orc Caves (a place) OOC
: out of character (an expression) ornate : an ornate, steel-shafted
warhammer (an item)

pb : parrying bonus (a stat) pbs : pale blue stone (an item) pc : a
player character (a mob played by a human) pelf(s) : an elf(elves) (a
race) per : perception (a stat) PK : Player Killer/Killing (a kind of
player/play) pkill : to kill another player (a kind of action)
Powerrangers : hardened rangers (mobs) PPI : The Prancing Pony Inn (a
place) ppl : people (an expression) PS : Player Stealer/Stealing (a kind
of player/play) psteal : to steal from another player (a kind of action)

r : are (an expression) Rdell : Rivendell (a city) RK : The return of
the King (one book of the LoTR) rl : real life (an expression) rofl :
rolls on the floor laughing (an expression) rotfl : rolls on the floor
laughing (an expression) roflmao : rofl + my a\*\* off (an expression)
roflmfao : rofl + my f\*\*\*ing a\*\* off (an expression) rog : The
Balrog (a mob) rp : role-playing (an expression) RTF : Road to Fornost
(a place) RtFM : Read the F\*\*\*ing Manual (a suggestion to lazy
people) RTGH : Road to Grey Havens (a place) RTT : Road to Tharbad (a
place) ruby : red ruby or ruby ring (items)

sable : a sable pouch (or cloak) (items) sapphire : a sapphire ring/star
sapphire (items) sbh : strange black helmet (an item or a place) sd : a
stonedoor (a place) Silm : The Silmarillion (a book of J.R.R. Tolkien)
shining : shining armour (items) sk : Spirit Knight (a mob) slender : a
slender dagger (an item) sppi : Sign of the Prancing Pony Inn (a place)
ssc : Small Stream Crossing (a place) ssm :
steel-shafted(mattock/hammer) (an item) str : strength (a stat)

Tbad : Tharbad (a city) tbh : to be honest (an expression) thick :
thick/heavy armour (usually) (items) thorn : a sharp thorn (an item) tmt
: Trail meets the Tributary (a place) tnl : (xp) 'til next level (an
expression) tnx : thanks (an expression) torc : Tarkhnarb orc (a race)
tower : tower shield (an item) tp, tps : travel point(s) (a stat) TT :
the Two Towers (one book of the LoTR)

u : you (an expression) una, unq : Unqalome (a mob) UnTa : The
Unfinished Tales (a book of J.R.R. Tolkien) ur : your (an expression)

V : a Vala (a type of god) Va : a Vala (Architect) (a type of god) vambs
: vambraces (an item) vellum : a vellum scroll (an item) VL : virtual
(an expression) Vm : a Vala (Mudller) (a type of god) Vt : Vale Tower (a
place) V+ : a Vala or higher (gods!)

wc : wight captain (a mob) wford : West of the Ford (see ford) (a place)
whammer : warhammer (an item) whobbit : hobbit (a race) wil : will (a
stat) wis : wisdom (a stat) wobbit : hobbit (a race) wp : war point (a
stat) ws : warsword (an item) wtf : what(or where) the f\*\*\* (an
expression) wtop : the Weathertop (a place) ww : wooden wall shield (an
item) xp : experience point (a stat) zorc : Zaugurz orc (a race)

</pre>