---
title: Ainur
---

The **Ainur** are the immortals of [MUME](MUME "wikilink"). They do not
take part of playing the game, but shape the world and keeps it running.

The Ainur are divided into groups, each of them divided into several
smaller groups. { \| **Ainu Levels**

- The Implementors
- The Aratar
  - Arata of Zones (Az)
  - Arata of Mobs/Objects (Am/o)
  - Arata of Code (Ac)
- The Valar
  - Mudllers (Vm)
  - Architects (Va)
- The Maiar
  - Shapers (Ms)
  - Wrights (Mw)
  - Builders (Mb)
  - Cartographers (Mc)
  - Boardreaders (M)

\|}

## Maiar

Newly created gods join the ranks of plain Maiar, also called
boardreaders, since what they can do mostly consists of reading boards
and handing out [newbie kits](newbie_kit "wikilink").

Helping with fixing typoes, trying out creating a test-zone and various
other tasks promotes an Ainur to become a Cartographer. Getting your own
[zone](zone "wikilink") to build also does this.

Completing a [zone](zone "wikilink"), buildingwise with all geography
and [descriptions](room_description "wikilink") complete can promote the
Cartographer towards Builder.

When your [zone](zone "wikilink") opens, the builder can be promoted to
Wright.

Higher levels can be applied for, and if an opening exist a Wright can
be recruited and trained.

## Valar

The Valar levels [Mudller](Mudller "wikilink") and
[Architect](Architect "wikilink") differ in level, but not in power.
They are practically the same level but with different job descriptions.
Mudllers write [mudlle](mudlle "wikilink")-code and Architects supervise
builders.

## Aratar

Similarly the Aratar level is only one level, with only one Arata per
job. One [Arata of Code](Arata_of_Code "wikilink"), one of
[Zones](Arata_of_Zones "wikilink"), etc. All Aratar are only seen with
the acronym A, no extra-letter is visible. Who is acting in which job
isn't really important to the public, but ask any Ainur and they'll
probably know the answer.

There are Aratar without this precise job description too, but they have
assignments and responsibilities (just not in plainsight for mortals).

[Category:Help files](Category:Help_files "wikilink")