---
title: Alweon's Versatile Caster Newbie Guide
permalink: /Alweon's_Versatile_Caster_Newbie_Guide/
---

## Alweon’s Versatile Caster Newbie Guide

Can't decide between playing a Mage or Cleric? This guide shows you how
to make just one character that can be a Mage, a Cleric, or a
combination of both depending on how you adjust your stats and spells
through training. By choosing a set of versatile stats right away, you
can swap back and forth with very little time and effort. This guide
also covers some basic leveling advice and caster tips. The target
audience for this guide is newer players.

Easiest way to chat with me is on Discord (Snafzg#9135) if you have
questions or comments.

### Race and Base Stats

Play around with [Jahara’s Stat
Generator](https://mume.schimmelmann.us/stats.htm) to get an
understanding about how base stats affect different spells and skills.
The generator is close but not perfect since we still don’t know all the
math even after all these years. Base stats are the ones you choose at
character creation and are not influenced by age or effect (spell,
potion, wound, etc.).

The best races to pick for a caster are Elf, Half-Elf, and Man based on
stats and racial bonuses. Elves have the best mana regeneration, disease
immunity, and the ability to walk on snow. They also age the slowest,
which means you can stay at optimal ages for longer periods of time
(type ‘help age’ in game). Elves are recommended due to racial bonuses,
but don’t let that stop you from playing Half-elf or Man. I don’t
recommend Hobbit or Dwarven casters for newbies.

Here are the recommended base stats for each race:

`Str:12 Int:19 Wis:18 Dex:11 Con:11 Wil:15 Per:10. (Elf)`
`Str:13 Int:18 Wis:19 Dex:12 Con:12 Wil:14 Per:10. (Half-Elf)`
`Str:13 Int:18 Wis:18 Dex:11 Con:12 Wil:15 Per:11. (Man)`

We have chosen these base stats for several reasons:

13 strength allows us to wield an Engraved Broadsword (excellent
all-around weapon) at 1st through 4th age without needing to rely on the
strength spell (Cleric), which we may not want to learn in Mage builds
(at least not until higher level). With a high Cleric level, the
strength spell can get you up to 17-18 strength, which is great for
wearing heavier gear, wielding bigger weapons, hitting harder in melee,
and having better overall encumbrance. As an Elf, you can only wield the
Engraved Broadsword at 2nd and 3rd age unless you pick up the strength
spell or improve your strength stat through training (see below).

Max intelligence/wisdom were chosen as they are the most important stats
for our spells, especially armour and shield (Mage) which boost our
defense. These stats also help our offensive spells do higher damage,
although many factors influence spell damage.

11-12 dexterity is not the most important stat for casters but it helps
us flee combat more reliably and slightly raises our defense. Being able
to flee before getting bashed and/or nuked can save us from taking a LOT
of damage in PvP especially if spell armour drops. This is also
important while fighting mobs, including supermobs (aka bosses).

11-12 constitution gives us a fair amount of hit points and movement
points to work with. Hit points are important but being able to flee
reliably and having a strong armour spell (Mage) that we keep refreshed
is even more important. We also have access to cure spells, which allow
us to quickly recover health at the cost of some mana.

14-15 willpower gives us pretty good mental spells and boosts our
offensive Cleric spells allowing us to be versatile. It also helps with
mana regeneration, reducing incoming spell damage, and resisting
incoming mental spells. As a base stat, willpower improves many spells
and skills we’ll utilize. Our mental spells can also be improved by
special items that buff our spellpower (see Tips and Tricks section).

10-11 perception mainly allows us to hit at least 100% tracking skill
(Ranger), which is important in both PvE and PvP. It also slightly
boosts our Mage nukes, and is said to affect line of sight while trying
to land spells on enemies in PvP. The sense life spell (Cleric) is
recommended in a few builds below as it slightly helps with PvP line of
sight in small skirmishes.

### Build Ideas (Spells and Skills)

You specialize your character by training combinations of spells and
skills at guild masters. Casters focus mostly on Mage and Cleric spells
with a variety of basic Ranger skills. We also practice a few key
Warrior and Thief skills, but not too many because it will lower the
effectiveness of our spells. Some players choose to make melee-combo
casters (e.g., Warmage), but that’s not the focus of this guide.

Depending on the build, we can improve or neglect our base stats through
the train command to achieve maximum efficiency. For example, if we play
a Mage that does not concern itself with mental spells like sleep,
charm, or silence, then we can ‘train neglect willpower’ to ‘train
improve constitution/dexterity’ to improve overall survivability. This
is a more advanced strategy and isn’t totally necessary to have a viable
character, so don’t feel like you need to do this. Training stats can
take approximately a month real time but happens in the background while
you play/rent.

These builds are what you want to achieve by level 26+ (referred to as
Legend Level). We will look at how to train as you level up in the
Leveling Guide section.

As mentioned above, every caster wants some basic Ranger, Warrior, and
Thief skills. Here are the rough minimums to achieve by Legend Level.
You don’t need to be exact and may prefer higher or lower depending on
your playstyle. Experiment to your liking!

##### Ranger Skills

Climb - 66% Command - \*\*\* only train if you want to charm pets
(described in more detail below) Ride - 85% Swim - 66% Track - 85% (if
you aren’t into player-killing) or 96%+ (if you are) Wilderness - 33%

##### Warrior Skills

Endurance - 1 practice Parry - 1 practice Slashing - 1 practice

##### Thief Skills

Attack - 1 practice (this helps us flee a bit better) Picking - 25%
(find some lockpicks and try to upgrade them a bit for improved picking)
Missile - 35% (optional for Cleric builds with blind spell)

Now let’s take a look at four newbie-friendly builds you might want to
try.

#### Basic Mage

This build delves deeply into Mage spells and picks up the bare minimum
of Cleric spells. It relies on stored earthquakes for solo XP and PvP
and brings a lot of firepower to groups who like to hunt supermobs or
explore the deepest, darkest corners of Arda. You can spy on your
enemies, portal to move your allies across vast distances, and possibly
surprise/trap your enemies in PvP. While this build has solo-play
viability, it truly shines for the player who spends most of their time
grouping..

Stat training recommendation (compare to your base stats by typing ‘inf
%b’ in game):

`Str:13 Int:19 Wis:18 Dex:12 Con:12 Wil:13 Per:10. (Elf) [-2 Wil, +1 Str/Dex/Con]`
`Str:13 Int:18 Wis:19 Dex:12 Con:12 Wil:14 Per:10. (Half-Elf) [No change]`
`Str:13 Int:18 Wis:18 Dex:12 Con:13 Wil:14 Per:10. (Man) [-1 Wil, +1 Dex/Con]`

##### Mage Spells

Max - Armour, Block Door, Burning Hands, Colour Spray, Earthquake,
Enchant (optional - see Focus Staff section), Fireball, Lightning Bolt,
Portal, Shield, Sleep (optional), Store, Teleport (optional)

Around 80% - Locate Life, Scry (optional), Watch Room (optional)

Around 40% - Detect Magic, Shroud

##### Cleric Spells

Max - Sanctuary/Break Door (optional level 45+)

Around 85% - Breath of Briskness

Around 75% - Cure Serious

Around 40% - Bless, Create Food, Create Water, Cure Critic, Remove
Poison, Sense Life (optional)

#### Charming Mage

Do you enjoy taking on challenges by yourself? Maybe you just prefer the
company of beasts over people? If so, then this is the build for you! To
make use of our pets, we must learn the command skill (Ranger). The more
pets you have, the higher you will need the command skill to
successfully command them (~90% for one pet, ~105% for two, etc.). Your
command success rate is also determined by the level of your pets.
Further advice on charm/command is in the Tips and Tricks section. This
build focuses mostly on Mage spells, while getting the bare minimum
Cleric spells.

Stat training recommendation:

I would lean toward leaving your base stats unchanged first to see how
successful you are at sleep, charm, and command because lowering
willpower could lead to issues. If you aren’t having trouble, you can
try the Basic Mage recommended stats. Just train back to your baseline
if things become a problem. Because this build is more solo-oriented,
you will rely on the sleep spell to help split up enemy groups while
leveling up or supermobbing so willpower is important.

##### Mage Spells

Max - Armour, Block Door, Burning Hands, Charm, Colour Spray,
Earthquake, Enchant (optional), Fireball, Lightning Bolt, Shield,
Silence (optional), Sleep, Store, Teleport (optional)

Around 75% - Locate Life (optional), Scry (optional), Watch Room
(optional)

Around 40% - Detect Magic, Shroud

##### Cleric Spells

Same as the Basic Mage.

#### Basic Cleric

This build focuses on high level Cleric spells and brings tons of
utility to groups through strong heals, buffs, and crowd control. Every
supermob group will want you to join them! You can use bows to put out
consistent damage against blind targets while leveling up (feel free to
practice some missile skill - Thief). Team up with a tanky warrior and
you have a fantastic leveling duo!

Stat training recommendations:

I suggest leaving your base stats unchanged for this build. You have the
strength spell, so even an Elf won’t have issues wielding an Engraved
Broadsword at any age. Plus your heals and buffs will make up for any
lacking defensive issues. You also have the word of recall spell should
the evil minions of Sauron gain the upper hand.

##### Cleric Spells

Max - Blind, Break Door, Breath of Briskness, Cure Serious (optional),
Dispel Evil, Fear (optional), Harm (optional), Heal, Sanctuary, Strength

Around 75% - Cure Critic, Protection from Evil (optional), Sense Life
(optional), Summon (optional), Word of Recall

Around 50% - Bless, Create Food, Create Water, Cure Blindness
(optional), Remove Poison

##### Mage Spells

Max - Armour, Shield

Around 80% - Block Door, Enchant (only for focus staff then train off)

Around 50% - Detect Magic, Shroud (optional)

#### Charming Cleric

This build leans a bit more into the Mage guild and the result is a
solo-powerhouse capable of taking on foes even in the depths of Moria.
You still have plenty of group utility as well, so you aren’t limited to
playing solo. You can pull off some fun things by casting sanctuary on
your beefy pets, having them tank big monsters, then dropping
earthquakes. You can also blind and shoot your foes while your pet
tanks. There are lots of options with this build. Don’t forget to pick
up the command skill to around 105% (Ranger).

Recommended training for stats:

I would again leave your base stats unchanged. I told you they were
versatile...

##### Cleric Spells

Max - Blind, Break Door, Breath of Briskness, Cure Serious (optional),
Dispel Evil, Heal, Sanctuary, Strength

Around 75% - Cure Critic, Protection from Evil, Sense Life (optional),
Word of Recall

Around 50% - Bless, Create Food, Create Water, Cure Blindness
(optional), Remove Poison

##### Mage Spells

Max - Armour, Shield, Charm, Store (optional), Earthquake (optional)

Around 80% - Block Door, Enchant (only needed to make a focus staff, can
train off after)

Around 50% - Detect Magic, Shroud (optional)

### Focus Staff

Please refer to the [Staff, Gem and Focus
guide](Staff,_Gem_and_Focus_guide "wikilink") for more details. To make
a staff, we need the enchant spell (Mage) even if we are a Cleric. This
can be trained off after we’re done with it to practice other things.
There are two embedding combinations I would recommend for the builds
listed above:

`Rubellite, opal, chunk/bracer/bar - Basic Mage and Basic Cleric`
`Opal, corberyl, chunk/bracer/bar - Charming Mage and Charming Cleric`

Making a focus staff can be challenging and time consuming, so don’t
feel the need to remake a staff if you decide to swap to another build.
At the time of writing this guide, the ability to dismantle staves is in
the game. Type ‘help dismantle’ in MUME to learn more.

### Leveling Guide

There are many ways to level up in MUME, so I won’t go into a crazy
amount of detail here. Feel free to ask specific questions in game such
as where to XP for your current level. Don’t be afraid to group with
other people whenever you can because that’s the best way to gain
knowledge about the game.

The nice part about our versatile build is that because a Mage is harder
to XP at lower levels, we can level up as a Cleric with blind, heals,
buffs, and a bow. Once we achieve level 18-20 we can swap to a Mage with
charm and earthquake until we hit Legend Level. Once we’re level 26+, we
can swap again and again to whatever we want! Using charm and/or
earthquake is by far the easiest way to level up when playing solo, but
there are many Legends who love to group, and it can be just as fast or
faster with the right leader.

#### Levels 1-11

Pick up the ride, swim, and climb skills to gather as many travel points
as you can before focusing too much on gaining experience. I would then
grab the missile skill (thief) and train more like a melee character in
the early levels. Find a light shield with a decent parry bonus. Focus
on small creatures for the early levels. Don’t forget to narrate and ask
for help if you need it! Grouping will also be a huge benefit as you can
chat and learn more about the game while you gain experience. Special
tips: Aldereon’s Quest is a great one to start at early levels (check
out Faine’s Guide) as you will gain some travel points along the way.
Also use MMapper to look for areas off the beaten path or behind secret
doors for bonus travel points.

#### Levels 11-20

Start training off your warrior and thief skills a bit but keep the
missile skill. I would begin training Cleric spells, especially blind.
You can solo more efficiently now, but group XP groups are also great as
they love your blinds! Just pluck your bow string over and over on blind
mobs for the win. You want to max your armour spell and shield too
around the later levels.

#### Levels 20-26

Continue to group as a Cleric with your core mage spells or if you
prefer to solo then train off most of your Cleric spells to pick up
charm and command. You can still keep workable blind (depending on
willpower and spellpower), breath of briskness, and cure serious spells,
which speeds things up even more. At level 21 make your focus staff. You
will need help with Old Man Willow so I hope you’ve been a nice little
caster so far...

#### Levels 26+

Pick any of the core builds and have fun! I personally enjoy using a
build with charm because it allows me to solo when I want and group when
groups are available but it’s totally up to you. Good luck!

### Tips and Tricks

- Check out [Faine’s page](http://faine.epizy.com/) for lots of useful
  information

<!-- -->

- Check [here](https://editthis.info/mumepedia/Mume_Skills_And_Spells)
  for a detailed list of skills and spells

<!-- -->

- Check the [General guide with rare useful
  information](General_guide_with_rare_useful_information "wikilink")
  for advanced knowledge and check out the charmies/pets section near
  the bottom

<!-- -->

- [Guide to install mmapper2 on
  Windows](Guide_to_install_mmapper2_on_Windows "wikilink") is
  invaluable to learn the game's map

<!-- -->

- Get the [Mudlet MUME
  script](https://sites.google.com/view/mume-mudlet) here

<!-- -->

- Get your focus staff at level 21 because it’s a total game changer.
  Even if you don’t have the gems yet, embed your metal items to buff
  the parry bonus. You can dismantle and embed the gems later (assuming
  dismantle is still an option).

<!-- -->

- Items with spellpower boost your chance to charm, blind, sleep,
  silence, etc. It boosts spell damage as well, but not by much. It also
  reduces backfire chance.

<!-- -->

- Magus (supermob) in Dol Goldur loads a fancy robe that offers +20
  spellpower for blind, which is amazing for Clerics, especially those
  who want to reliably blind in PvP. You can keep it in your backpack
  and swap when needed.

<!-- -->

- If you really want a reliable PK blind, you may also want to boost
  willpower by +1 through training in addition to acquiring the Magus
  robe.

<!-- -->

- Use metal armour for quake-xping, fine/shining mail for PvP (gives you
  some absorb when your armour spell drops), and plain clothes if you
  want to be quick and agile (be warned you will take a lot of melee
  damage when your armour spell drops).

<!-- -->

- You can save lots of gold at low levels by using cheaper armour that
  is lower condition (e.g., well-maintained, aged) because as long as
  your armour spell is up, your physical armour will not absorb the
  attack damage.

<!-- -->

- Look for swords with a good defensive bonus (Faine has a great list of
  weapons) until you can get an Engraved Broadsword. You will spend most
  of your life on wimpy (help mood in game) and using as much defensive
  gear as possible. Unless you choose to play a max strength Cleric,
  then perhaps you can grab a warhammer or other such offensive item…

<!-- -->

- The vast majority of charmed pets will be aggressive to your allies.
  As long as you are the first person in the room (e.g., leading), your
  pets will not hit your friends. If you flee the room (leaving your
  pets behind) or enter a room with a player standing in it, your pets
  will attack the other player. This is a blessing when hunting down
  evil players.

<!-- -->

- You can not bring most pets into cities or friendly towers without the
  guards attacking them. This could get you wanted by the justice
  system. Instead, rest or sleep the pets outside.

### Player Feedback

Please place any feedback below this line and include your character
name if you want to help improve the guide. Additional Tips and Tricks
are also welcome. Thanks for reading!