---
title: Armour
---

**MUME Armours**

There are two basic ways to protect yourself. Armour, and shields.

*Shields* - Provide pb. Good shields of low weight (best to worst):
bejewelled shield (also provides savespell), smelly piece of worm hide
(same as bej but stylish. :D), gilded round shield, shield of Arthedain,
shield of Cardolan High pb shields: tower shield, ancient dwarven shield
(anti-evil, as good as tower), blackened dwarven shield (evil, as good
as tower), large metal wall shield (bejewelled is as good pbwise and is
lighter, though) Bucklers: metal buckler is best, and easy to find
(other than artifact)

*Armours* - Lowers damage. Two numbers important here: absorb and max.
Absorb is the relative % of damage the armour takes. However, the max
determines the maximum amount of damage per hit the armour can absorb.
If the % of the damage the absorb is greater than the max, only the max
is absorbed. The basic armours come in four types: cloth, soft leather,
hard leather, chainmail, and metal These types come in three levels
(except cloth): normal, sturdy, and fine. Sturdy and fine provide less
penalties and more protection than normal, fine being the best. Cloth
adds to db, but has no bonus to armour. Most plain clothes are as good
as they can get, but of note are grey tunic (higher than average db) and
white robe (db+spellsave). Soft leather has low abs and low max. Hard
leather has high abs low max. Chainmail has low abs high max. Metal has
high abs high max. There are also a few other armours of note. Scale
mail has similar max to chainmail but higher abs. White chainmail has
similar abs to chainmail but higher max. Shining chainmail has lower abs
than normal chainmail but significantly higher max. Shining platemail
has the highest protection of any of the armours. Also of note: metal
set does not have a particular helmet. Good choices of helmet are large
visored helmet (semi-artifact), horse-crested helm, great helm, spiked
metal helmet, full metal helmet. Good choices for belts are gleaming
belt (speeds up moveregen) and broad silver belt (adds to db). Belt of
pearl and crystals is lightest belt otherwise. Sash is light too. Good
choices for worn about body are: forest green cloak or russet cloak
(decent db, speeds up moveregen), roughly stitched cloak (not as much
moveregen as fgc but more db), fine grey cloak (most db but slows down
hp regen a tiny bit), black hooded cloak (evil version of finegrey,
makes spells hurt a bit more instead), sacred cloak (for battling
spirits) for defensive and cavebear fur or black warg fur (lighter) for
ob. Beorn fur is best for ob but rare.