---
title: Bill Ferny
tags:
  - Mobiles
---
**Bill Ferny** is a man of poor reputation living in
[Bree](Bree "wikilink")-land. Although he was once a law-abiding
citizen, he has been cast out on charges of aiding
[Sauron](Sauron "wikilink")'s forces, and now lives in a
cleverly-disguised shanty in the marshes east of Bree, accompanied by
other criminals and outlaws. He is considered mischievous, thieving, and
downright evil.

## In MUME

\> examine ferny

Bill is a swarthy fellow with small, squinting eyes. Around him a sour
stench

of stale sweat is hanging. He is dressed in an assortment of odd,
mismatched

clothes, likely loot from his various theft raids.

Bill Ferny is using: \<worn as shield\> a large metal full shield
(flawless) \<worn on head\> a leather helmet (worn) \<worn on body\> a
rigid leather breastplate (worn) \<worn about body\> a buttoned cassock
(well-maintained) \<worn on arms\> a sturdy pair of rigid leather
sleeves (neglected) \<worn on hands\> a fine pair of rigid leather
gloves (worn) \<worn on feet\> a pair of soft leather boots
(satisfactory) \<worn on finger\> a ring

## Location

From the junction south of Bree, go all e, neneene 5n 2e. There you will
find a hidden 'bush' marked by a cloth, 'open bush' and go down to the
west end of a small hidden trail leading east to his shanty.

## Strategy

Although Bill Ferny is not an exceptionally powerful mob, he can pose a
challenge to lower-[level](level "wikilink") groups.

If you have a [basher](bash "wikilink") in your group, make sure it
keeps Bill bashed, but other than that, the strategy is to just hit him
dead along with the two thugs and the [robber](robber "wikilink") that
load in his room.

If you have the [earthquake](earthquake "wikilink") spell, you can
[shroud](shroud "wikilink") yourself and quake him and his posse. You
won't even need to store your quakes since Bill can't see through
shroud.

Loot the small twisted root from his corpse, unlock and open 'wall', go
east, pick open 'floorboards' and loot a [shield of
Arthedain](shield_of_Arthedain "wikilink") off the ground.
