---
title: Category:Basics
tags: ["Help files"]
---
This is a brief outline of some of the basic commands that are used in
Mume. Further help is available for each of them by clicking on the
name, an example '[Look](Look "wikilink")'. Most of these commands will
be self-evident once you have seen the name, but please read or at least
skim the help on them. The FAQ files provide help on related commands to
those mentioned below and explain solutions to common problems such as
getting equipment and wearing it.

[Look](Look "wikilink") - This is used to look at people, objects,
exits, creatures, or rooms. It will provide a description on what is
being looked at if one is available.

[Examine](Examine "wikilink") - This command can be used to look at an
object, person, creature, or room. It sometimes provides more detailed
information than LOOK, for example when used on a person or a container.

[Equipment](Equipment "wikilink") (abbreviated EQ) - shows a list of the
items which you are wearing or holding. This will include your clothing
and anything which you are holding in your hands, as well as things
being worn on your belt.

[Inventory](Inventory "wikilink")(abbreviated IN) - shows a list of the
items which you are not wearing or holding in your hands, but which you
are carrying with you.

[Wield](Wield "wikilink") - picks up a weapon in your hand so that it
can be used. Example: 'wield longsword'

[Wear](Wear "wikilink") - puts on an article of clothing or armor. 'wear
shield' will put a shield on the arm that you are not using for your
weapon; that hand must be free (not holding anything). You can also wear
some things on your belt. 'wear lantern belt' will put a lantern on your
belt and light it.

[Exits](Exits "wikilink") - This command shows all the exits out of the
current room you are in, except for hidden exits. In general usage, even
outdoor areas are called rooms; not only the rooms inside a house.

[North](North "wikilink"), [East](East "wikilink"),
[South](South "wikilink"), [West](West "wikilink"), [Up](Up "wikilink"),
[Down](Down "wikilink") - You can move between rooms with several
commands. For example if you type 'EXITS' and it lists an exit to the
east, then you can type 'EAST' to go in that direction. Some exits might
need the climb skill to climb up a tree, or that you have a boat to go
into a lake. You can abbreviate these commands: 'N', 'E', and so on.

[Narrate](Narrate "wikilink"), [Say](Say "wikilink"),
[Sing](Sing "wikilink"), [Tell](Tell "wikilink") - These are commands
used to communicate with other people. These are the preferred ones,
there are some others but these are simple to use and can reach most
people you might want to. [Narrate](Narrate "wikilink") and
[Sing](Sing "wikilink") are global channels, which means anyone who
wants to can hear them anywhere. [Say](Say "wikilink") is for people in
the same room as you. [Tell](Tell "wikilink") is used to talk to one
particular person no matter where they are. Read [FAQ5](FAQ5 "wikilink")
and the help files for more help. NOTE: You will only hear narrates and
songs from the side which you are currently playing on. Orcs cannot hear
narrates made by Elves, for example.

[Rest](Rest "wikilink"), [Sleep](Sleep "wikilink") - These allow you to
rest or sleep and thereby regain your health (hits) after a battle,
movement points (after moving) , or mana (used to cast spells) at a
faster rate than you would if you were standing.

[Wake](Wake "wikilink"), [Stand](Stand "wikilink") - If you sleep, rest
or fall down you will need to wake and/or stand before performing
certain actions such as walking or fighting.

[Drink](Drink "wikilink"), [Eat](Eat "wikilink") - You can drink out of
a fountain by typing 'drink fountain' or drink out of a cup such as are
in the newbie kits by typing 'drink cup'. To eat some bread you can type
'eat bread'. If you are hungry or thirsty you will not be able to
recover from your exertions (such as fighting) as quickly. Read
[FAQ3](FAQ3 "wikilink") on how to fill cups, and [FAQ4](FAQ4 "wikilink")
on how to hunt for food.

[Time](Time "wikilink") - This command gives the present time to the
best of your ability to guess. It is not possible to judge the time of
day inside a cave or shop but you will still be able to check the date,
and other information. For information on months and such type 'help
MONTH'.

[Info](Info "wikilink") - This command gives you information on your
character, such as age, weight, hits, mana, experience and other
statistics. The 'SCORE' and 'STAT' commands show quick useful subsets of
this information.

[Score](Score "wikilink") - This gives information on your current hits,
mana and movement points. It is not accessible while in combat, but the
prompt will show you some approximations such as '\* HP:Fine' when you
have been damaged lightly.

[Stat](Stat "wikilink") - This command shows things like OB (offensive
bonus), DB (dodge bonus), PB (parry bonus) and is available during
combat. It also show things like how much you need to gain a level, and
if you are affected by spells, poisons, wounds, or diseases.

[Practice](Practice "wikilink") - This command shows what skills or
spells you have learnt, how well you mastered them, and how many
practice sessions you can still use at a guild to improve your
abilities. In the presence of a guildmaster,
'[Practice](Practice "wikilink")' shows what is available to be learned,
and how hard it will be to learn it. Check the guild boards
([FAQ5](FAQ5 "wikilink")), libraries and other sources of information to
decide what to practice.

[Consider](Consider "wikilink") - You use this to consider if it would
be a wise idea to attack a creature. For example 'CONSIDER spider' might
tell you that killing a tiny spider would be easy indeed; 'CONSIDER
Elrond' might tell you that you must be mad to even think of attacking
him. This is only an approximate result and does not take into account
your equipment and skill in combat.

[Change Wimpy](Wimpy "wikilink") <NUMBER> - This command allows you to
set an amount of hits that you will try and automatically flee at. For
example you might have 30 hits and decide that you do not to get into a
serious fight. So you set your wimpy to 20 by typing CHANGE WIMPY 20.
This means you will automatically try to flee after you go below 20
hits. Not every attempt at fleeing is successful, so you might want to
FLEE manually.

[Kill](Kill "wikilink") - This command causes you to attack a creature
or person. Read '[Justice](Justice "wikilink")' before killing a citizen
of a city, and '[Rules PK](Rules_PK "wikilink")' before attacking
another player.

[Flee](Flee "wikilink") - A very useful command when things are not
going the way you had hoped or when attacked by an aggressive creature
such as a black wolf. If it works you will flee the room you are in,
leaving through a random exit. You might not be able to break contact
with your enemy and flee the first time. Beware, some creatures such as
wolves might decide to track you down for a distance before returning
home if they haven't caught you.

See also: [Newbie](Newbie "wikilink"), [FAQ1](FAQ1 "wikilink"),
[FAQ2](FAQ2 "wikilink"), [FAQ3](FAQ3 "wikilink"),
[FAQ4](FAQ4 "wikilink"), [FAQ5](FAQ5 "wikilink"),
[Advanced](Advanced "wikilink"), [Features](Features "wikilink"),
[Rules](Rules "wikilink")
