---
title: "Cleaving weapon"
permalink: "/Cleaving_weapon/"
---

# Offensive

## mighty dwarven axe

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is good while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
considerable damage upon hitting. It weighs six pounds.

## double-headed axe

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is average while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
average damage upon hitting. It weighs six pounds.

# Defensive

## battle axe

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is poor while
attacking and average while defending; its speed is slow, and it
inflicts average damage upon hitting. It weighs five pounds.

# Average

## butcher's cleaver

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is awful while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is fast, and it inflicts
very little damage upon hitting. It weighs about one pound.

## brutal cleaver

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is average while
attacking and average while defending; its speed is slow, and it
inflicts considerable damage upon hitting. It weighs five pounds.

## woodsman's axe

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is awful while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is average, and it
inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs four pounds.

## black waraxe

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is poor while
attacking and average while defending; its speed is average, and it
inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.

## handaxe

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is poor while
attacking and average while defending; its speed is average, and it
inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.

## hatchet

This cleaving weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is poor while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is average, and it
inflicts very little damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.