---
title: Corpse
---

When a living creature dies, it leaves a [corpse](corpse "wikilink")
which contains the worldly possessions that were carried at the moment
of [death](death "wikilink"). You can loot the corpses of your fallen
enemies and friends. You can also [bury](bury "wikilink") corpses,
[burn](burn "wikilink") them, or (if your mind is truly twisted) come up
with many other things you could do with the corpse of a fallen enemy.

If you have died, you can try to retrieve your
[equipment](equipment "wikilink"), but be aware that corpses do decay
after some time. Rumour says this takes a bit longer than a full
MUME-day.

In case a true [hero](hero "wikilink") meets his (not so final) demise,
there is a chance a guardian-[shadow](shadow "wikilink") rises and tries
to prevent other players from looting the corpse.

When [drowning](drowning "wikilink") in a river or other large body of
water, it may happen your corpse get carried away by the current. In
this case you may be able to discover it by following the stream of the
water.

Sometimes corpses can not be recovered at all, for example, if you
happened to die in an extremely dangerous place (also known as [death
trap](death_trap "wikilink")).

Note that dense [fog](fog "wikilink") may make it impossible to see
items on the ground; that includes corpses.

Some creatures, such as [ghosts](ghost "wikilink"), do not leave a
corpse behind, once they are put to their final rest.

Corpses "inherit" the keywords of the corresponding living creature,
followed by "-corpse": for example, dwarf-corpse, wolf-corpse, and so
on.

See also: [Decapitate](Decapitate "wikilink"), [Drag](Drag "wikilink"),
[Drain](Drain "wikilink"), [Hang](Hang "wikilink")

[Category:Help files](Category:Help_files "wikilink")