---
title: Death trap
---

A **death trap** is a [room](room "wikilink") where anyone who enters
dies immediately. Examples of death traps are bottomless pits, gaping
precipices, or lava-filled lakes. Upon entering a death trap, you will
have one chance to retrace your steps. Failure means instant death; your
[equipment](equipment "wikilink"), except some particular cases, will be
lost forever. If you are leading a [group](group "wikilink") and you
stumble in a DT, your [followers](follow "wikilink") will see your fatal
mistake and will not follow you.

All the death traps in Arda are clearly marked: if you read the
descriptions thoroughly, and if you '[look](look "wikilink")
<direction>' when you are in doubt, you should have little chance of
entering a death trap. Some DTs are lit so you can have little doubts
about what they are - e.g. "In Mid-Air", but others are not - e.g. "A
Dark Hole" would look silly if lit. Many death-traps cannot be
[fled](flee "wikilink") into, but this is not a rule.

Unless you recently met \*an Enemy\*, dying in a death trap does not
reduce your [experience](experience "wikilink"), but it will decrease
your [travel points](travel_point "wikilink") total. Should it fall
below the minimum required for your present [level](level "wikilink"),
you will lose a level. Trolls are the only exception: falling into a DT
for a [troll](troll "wikilink") entails a small loss of experience
points.

If you walk into a death trap after you recently met \*an Enemy\*, you
may suffer a pkill death. See [Death](Death "wikilink") for more
details.

[Category:Help files](Category:Help_files "wikilink")