---
title: Detect Magic
---

**Detect Magic** is a low level [mage](mage "wikilink")
[spell](spell "wikilink"), castable on one's self only. It enables the
caster to detect the auras left by the spells of other casters, up to
several hours after those spells have been cast. It also reveals the
[alignment](alignment "wikilink") of the casters of those spells,
whether good, neutral, or evil.

Another effect is that it enables the caster to detect the presence of
magical [enchantments](enchant "wikilink") on items. This can be useful
in determining whether or not a [weapon](weapon "wikilink") needs to be
enchanted. Perhaps its most useful effect for a lowbie is that it allows
one to browse through a store's inventory in search of pre-enchanted
items.

This spell also allows to detect whether a room is watched by a [Watch
Room](Watch_Room "wikilink") spell or has a [Portal](Portal "wikilink")
leading into it. If the caster is very skilled in detect magic, having
this spell up also allows to see magical keys of locations from which
the caster's room is watched, to which a portal is leading from his
room, or from which a portal is coming to his room.

Unfortunately, in spite of the low level of this spell, there are few
[guildmasters](guildmaster "wikilink") that teach Detect Magic to the
free races.

Syntax : cast 'detect magic' \[self-only\] Type : Detection
Accumulative: No Duration : Yes Casting : Normal Position : Standing
Level : Level 2 Class : Magic User Min. Mana : 5 Example: \> cast
'detect magic'

This spell can be learned from:

`                     Sessions `
[`Erestor`](Erestor "wikilink")`                     8`
[`Lórien Mage Guild`](Lórien_Mage_Guild "wikilink")`           6`

## See also

- [Detect Invisibility](Detect_Invisibility "wikilink"), [Night
  Vision](Night_Vision "wikilink")

[Category:Spells](Category:Spells "wikilink") [Category:Mage
spells](Category:Mage_spells "wikilink") [Category:Shaman
spells](Category:Shaman_spells "wikilink")