---
title: FAQ2
---

Q: "I have to go. How do I keep my stuff?" A: You have to find an Inn,
go to the innkeeper, and type 'RENT'. This will allow you to keep your
equipment, food, weapon, etc. - assuming you have enough rent money!

Q: "Suppose I just type 'quit' instead?" A: If you type "quit", all your
stuff falls on the ground in a big pile! You keep your money but are
otherwise naked. You probably want to avoid this.

Q: "Okay, suppose I just turn off my computer or disconnect?" A: Usually
this is even worse than typing 'quit'! Doing this causes you to be
charged rent at a VERY HIGH rate! You will probably run out of money and
lose ALL your possessions.

Q: "How do I find out if I have enough money to rent?" A: When you are
at the innkeeper, type 'offer'. He will tell you how long you can stay,
in Real-Life time. If he says 'six days', that is six real days, not six
MUME days.

Q: "Can't the innkeeper multiply? The rate per day and the length of
time I

- - Return: continue, b: back one page, r: redisplay, q:quit (47%)
    \*\*\*

can stay don't match." A: Rent is non-linear. If your base rent is 1
silver a day, and you have five silver, that might be enough for 15
days. If you have ten silver, that might me enough for two months. The
longer you stay, the lower your -average- rent per day (for the stay)
will be.

Q: "But what happens if I run out of money?" A: Unfortunately, if you
run out of money, the innkeeper will take ALL your possessions. That's
why it's good to use the 'offer' command.

Q: "The innkeeper says, 'I refuse to store a key, small plant, boat, or
some other thing.' How can I keep then?" A: You can't. You might as well
just drop them, because you can't store them.

Q: "If I have enough money, does it prevent my character from being
deleted?" A: NO. Characters are automatically deleted when they haven't
been played for a length of time which depends on your Level. A level 1
character will be deleted after a couple days. A level 2 character will
last for five days; a level 3 for 10, and so on. The amount of rent
money you have does not affect this.

[Category:Help_files](Category:Help_files "wikilink")