---
title: "FAQ5"
---

Q: "What is a bulletin board?" A: A bulletin board is an object that can
be read by players, and in most cases written on. Boards usually have a
topic, e.g. the Warrior Bulletin board covers topics interesting to
warriors, the General board covers subjects that don't fit on any of the
specialty boards, and so on.

Q: "How do I find a bulletin board?" A: There is a board containing
advice for new players in the Halls of Mandos where new players start,
and people come to after they die. There are several bulletin boards in
most major towns. Check your newbie map (look map) for places such as
guilds and inns for some boards.

Q: "When I find one what do I do with it?" A: To look at a list of
messages on the board use 'look board'. This will show the number for
the post, its title, and name of the person posting. An example might
be, '1969 : How to hunt food (Huntar)'. To read this message you would
type 'read 1969', and the message would show on your screen.

Q: "How do I reread a message, since it does not show on the board now?"
A: When you read a message the board then marks the message as having
been read. To reread a message you know the number (#) of, you can
simply type: 'read \#'. By typing 'look all board' you can see all
messages listed, no matter if they have been marked as read or not.

Q: "How do I write a message on the boards?" A: First of all you have to
decide what is the correct board to post on. A message about a thief
practicing backstab and looking for advice on it belongs on the Thief
board. To write a message you type 'write <topic>'. The topic is what it
is about. An editor will pop up that you can type in. Type '%h' for help
on how to use the editor when in it. When you finish your mes board. To
reply to someone else's message you can type 'reply <number>' where the
number is the number of the post you are replying to, e.g. 'reply 1969'.
In reply the title will be based on the title of the previous message.

Q: "What is a library in Mume? Anything like one in real life?" A: A
library in Mume is a place where books can be read that have been
written by experienced adventures. They cover topics for new players
like skills to learn, places to visit, how to fight, guides for new
players, how to make money, etc.

Others cover the rise and fall of cities and kingdoms, teach about gems,
and how to make maps.

Q: "Where are these libraries?" A: If you have a map in your newbie kit
type 'look map' and look for a room saying Library. All the race homes
have them, though some towns and villages do not.

Q: "How do I know what books are here?" A: You can see a listing of the
books available to be read in a library by typing 'look books'. This
will provide a list of all the books in that particular library.
Librarians in different towns collect to their own interests, some have
books in common with other libraries, and some have unique books not
found elsewhere.

Q: "Now that I can see the books, how do I read them?" A: Well, that
depends on the book. Books without an index are read simply by typing
'read "<name>"': for example, 'read "MUME Combat"'. Newer books are
divided into chapters, and they are a little more complex. An example of
an excellent book for people to read is "'Strider's Guide for the Young
Adventurer' by Strider, the Elven Cleric". This can be read by typing
'read Strider contents' to see the contents page. Then to read the first
chapter, you type 'read strider chapter 1', and so on. To read it all at
once you type 'read strider all'.

Q: "What is this News, and/or Mail thing I see mentioned when I log in?"
A: The News and mail boards are somewhat more complex versions of the
bulletin boards mentioned above.

The News board is for people to read messages from the Ainur on changes
to Mume. It can be accessed from anywhere using commands common to the
bulletin boards except, to read message number 997 you type 'news 997'
not the 'read 997' you would at a board.

The Mail board is used to send mail to other people in Mume. Go to one
of the mailboxes, usually there is one in any city. It can be looked at
by typing 'look mail' to see incoming mail, and 'look sent mail' to see
outgoing mail.

Reading a mail is a matter of typing 'read <number>'.

To write a mail you use 'write <topic> @<name>' an example being 'write
Lets discuss a playing time @Huntar'. The same editor used in writing on
boards will be used.

[Category:FAQS](Category:FAQS "wikilink")