---
title: Galerel's mansion
---

**Galerel's mansion** is an abandoned house located east of
[Bree](Bree "wikilink"), notable for being the location where the [ghost
of Galerel](ghost_of_Galerel "wikilink") may be encountered. The
entrance can be found in a hidden ravine behind a wall of bushes
somewhere on the plains just east of the [Midgewater
Marsh](Midgewater_Marsh "wikilink").

The front [door](door "wikilink") to the mansion is locked and the lock
needs to be [picked](pick "wikilink") if one wishes to enter. There is a
guestbook in the entrance hall where players may sign their name or read
the previous entries. Also on the first floor is the kitchen, where one
may find some smoked and cured [meat](meat "wikilink") in the stove.

There is another locked door on the second floor of the mansion, which
requires a [key](tinted_brass_key "wikilink") to open. The key can be
found on a [black crow](black_crow "wikilink") that normally wanders
around nearby, just south of the Hedge.

The door leads to a balcony, where the **winch** command can be used to
haul up a basket. Entering the basket causes it to start descending
towards the platform where the ghost of Galerel awaits.

All 4 exits from the platform lead to the same location - the
[room](room "wikilink") directly below the platform. Getting back up
requires a fairly high [climb](climb "wikilink") skill, though you will
not take a lot of damage if you fail to climb up. Galerel himself will
not leave the platform. When he is killed, all his items will also fall
down to the room below.

In most rooms of the building, messages about strange noises or
mysterious movements will occasionally appear. These seem to be just to
create the mood and do no have any gameplay significance.

[Category: Locations](Category:_Locations "wikilink")