---
title: Group
tags:
  - Help files
  - Commands
---
Syntax : **group** \[character \[add \| remove \| transfer\]\]

Getting into a group of players is one of the best ways to start the
game. When in a group, any [experience](experience "wikilink") gained
from killing a [mobile](mobile "wikilink") or player will be spread
amongst its members, whether a specific member attacked or not.
Experience is still gained for damage, which is not spread in the group.
When the death occurs, all grouped members \*in the same room\* will
gain their share, according to the experience levels of members. Because
you do not fight the mobile/player single-handedly, your
[trophy](trophy "wikilink") does not increase for that mob as much as it
would otherwise.

Members need not [follow](follow "wikilink") the leader in order to be
grouped. All groups need a leader, who should be followed by the members
if they are to move about. To become a leader simply ask the other
members to follow you in the order you wish your team to go in. The last
to use the 'follow' command being the one following closest behind. You
do not have to be the leader and the grouper, though that is the norm.
The first person that uses the 'follow' command will be the last one who
enters a room in a group.

When entering a [room](room "wikilink"), the first person is called the
'tank' or 'buffer'. It is him/her who is first targeted by mobiles,
while successive followers will be also hit. Should someone
[flee](flee "wikilink") or [die](death "wikilink"), the first person to
attack after the buffer will normally become the new one. Players who
flee and return are then considered the last into the room and so are
last to be targeted again.

Any non-buffer may draw the attacks away from the buffer by using the
'[rescue](rescue "wikilink")' command. This is an admirable ability for
warriors to have.

To display the members of a group, enter 'group' with no argument. E.g.
\> group Your group consists of: Dragon (Head of group) Quifael Redferne
To add a member to your group, type 'group <name>' (or 'group <name>
add'). Only the group leader may add new members to the group.

To remove a member from your group, type 'group <name>' again (if you
aren't sure the character is grouped, use 'group <name> remove').

If the group leader types 'group <leader_name>' he or she will disband
the entire group. If a group member types 'group <self>', he leaves the
group.

The group leader can transfer leadership to another group member by
typing 'group <new_leader> transfer'.

NOTE: Only mobs who follow or are [ridden](ride "wikilink") by a player
member of the group can be grouped.

See also: [Experience](Experience "wikilink")
