---
title: Guide to advanced character statistics
---

**Introduction**

Ever since [NEWS 2157](http://mume.org/Import/News/2157.php) characters
in MUME have been able to improve and neglect base abilities as a
replacement for partial rerolls that were previously given out after a
month of retirement. This "training reroll" acts as a second partial
reroll along with the "retirement partial reroll". The obvious benefits
of using both these features in conjunction is the improvement of old
characters that were previously unplayable due to changing game
mechanics.

However, training can also be (ab)used with new characters to improve
practice percentages! Read the following from HELP TRAIN:

`   NOTE: Unlike rerolls, training does not affect your practice percentages. The`
`   percentage to which you can practice a skill is only based on your reference`
`   abilities.`

This means that characters can be created with "unplayable" base
abilities that result in higher practice percentages can then be
adjusted into something even more powerful through training! All it
takes is the careful application of what certain statistics do and
whether or not they are required in the final result of the character.
After deciding what to slowly train/neglect skills it takes about a
months worth of time for the character to reach the limit of the reroll.

**Statistic Effects**

The following table provides exactly what each stat helps with; if you
want to see what stats do with practice percents I suggest you look at a
[stat generator](http://nschimme.googlepages.com/stats.htm).

<nowiki>g Strength: Wieldable Weapons, Carrying Capacity/Fleeing,
Offensive Bonus Intelligence: Maximum Mana, Armour Spell, (Herblore?)
Wisdom: Maximum Mana, Herblore, (Sanctuary Absorb?) Dexterity: Natural
Dodge Bonus, Fleeing Rate, Maximum Moves Constitution: Maximum
Hit/Movement points, Movement Regen Will: Resisting/Casting Influence of
Hostile Magic, Regeneration Perception: Detection, Line of Sight

</pre>

Generally training is primarily useful for improving strength; dexterity
and constitution are also useful, but the best really depends on a
player's style of play. These physical stats give the most improvement
for a character outside of practice percentages. On the flip side, the
best stat for neglecting is perception due to its relatively minor
effects. Because of this training is less useful for characters that
have very little perception and more useful for magic users, thieves,
and tracking warriors.

**A Couple Examples**

Say we take a powerful cleaving dwarf that has absolutely no chance of
tracking (63% according to the statgen).

<nowiki>gStr:19 Int: 9 Wis: 7 Dex:15 Con:19 Wil:16 Per: 7. (Dwarf: Pure
Warrior)

</pre>

By adjusting the stats slightly we are able to take away from Wil and
Dex and boost Int and Per giving us 85% track. This is better
considering the amount of stat points spent and the resulting practice
percentages. The character that we would therefore create and start
leveling would be using the following stats:

<nowiki>gStr:19 Int:12 Wis: 7 Dex:14 Con:19 Wil:15 Per:10. (Dwarf:
Untrained Tracking Warrior)

</pre>

After creating the character we can then train neglect Int and Per and
train improve Dex and Wil back up to the values in the previous stats.
Since Wil and Dex aren't that important for practice percentages we are
able to neglect them for the purposes of learning track while still
creating an extremely tough dwarf who will be able to dodge and
regenerate moves on par with the original model that we based these
stats on!

This technique is far more effective with combo classes where we boost
the two main class skills at the cost of survivability. Here is an
example of a bolting thief with 100% thief and 98% mage skills:

<nowiki>gStr:13 Int:16 Wis:14 Dex:19 Con:13 Wil:11 Per:14. (Elf:
Unplayable Thief-mage)

</pre>

This is mediocre overall, if not impossible to play. Instead of trying
to placate both basic physical and mental abilities we will instead
boost perception which is necessary for thief skill percentages and
reduce constitution and strength (the stats that benefit the most from
training). After the modification of the previous model, this character
will have 104% thief skills from the 17 perception:

<nowiki>gStr:11 Int:16 Wis:14 Dex:19 Con:12 Wil:11 Per:17. (Elf:
Untrained Thief-mage)

</pre>

The next step then is creating the character where we then train down
perception and then train up Con/Str for better physical stats so that
he can take more punishment and wield better bows while still retaining
the thief percentages of 17 perception!

Ripped from [thread](http://mume.org/forum/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=12)