---
title: Herblore
permalink: /Herblore/
---

## Antidote

Poison is often deadly, and requires immediate action. Nature has
provided us with certain herbs to defend ourselves from this vicious
danger, if we know how to use them. Unfortunately, any remedy we hope to
make will be very complex. The simplest, and most effective, is outlined
below.

First, a base is made with two handfuls of blackberries, because of
their healthy juice. Water lily petals,to purify the blood, and figwort,
to purge the stomach, make that a thick paste. Finally the healing
properties of the kingsfoil make it really efficient.

This mixture will not only cure most of the poisons that can be find in
plants and water, but as well purge your body from the somewhat annoying
effects of any potions.

## Arachnia

Among the beasts of our lands, the spiders are the most feared, mostly
because they sting their victim and inject a poison which slows their
moves and their brain. Thanks to a careful study of the grey spider
anatomia, we have been able to use the venom sack of this beast to
produce a terribly dangerous poison. In a bowl, crush the tail of a
young salamander into a shapeless pulp. Add the fur of a bat to
stabilize the components, and, most important, the fluid sack of a grey
spider. The sack must have been butchered recently from the monster, and
kept in a wet sack during its transport. Mix the three ingredients until
a brownish liquid is obtained.

## Belladonna

The plants of the wilderness have a large spectrum of applications.
Those who know the use of three natural ingredients can produce a mild
poison. Crush carefully the tongue of a frog in a vial, as base for your
concoction. Get a freshly recolted Belladonna, the plant known for its
dangerous properties. Use the fruits or the leaves of the plant, for it
is where its essence is mostly concentrated. Add then a red mushroom,
the sort which gives headache and dizziness when eaten. Mix the reagents
and seal the liquid in a vial. That draught will weaken your opponent,
who will lose an important part of his skills. It can of course be used
to poison your arrows or your blade.

## Clear thoughts

To create this wizard's brew, you must obtain juniper berries for
promotion of higher thought. Mix these with the mystical mauve petals,
to boost creativity, and sage to clear the mind. Finally, some thyme is
needed to aid the memory. This brew will give the mage more energy, and
replenish his energy at a faster rate. However, when the beneficial
effects expire, he will be mentally exhausted.

## Psylonia

Anyone who ate the wrong mushroom knows that the effects of mushroom
intoxication can be really surprising. Headache, dizziness,
hallucinations are some of the possible symptoms. Some people, like the
inhabitants of the remote land known as Yuka Taan, south of Harad, use
mushrooms as a drug. Others have found a more warlike usage. The orcs of
the east know many preparations based on mushrooms. One of the most
efficient, a poison which does not kill the victims, but drains them and
stop their concentration, is described here. The base is made by a
handful of inkberries from Hollin. A red mushroom is crushed with the
berries, to thicken the paste. The third ingredient is the most
important: the rare, sickly green, mushroom. It must be added before the
concoction is mixed. Few people have ever found this mushroom: it is
rumoured to grow in humid caves or in the darkest forests of the land.

## Seeing

In the wild strange plants with strange properties can be found. One of
the strangest is the phosphorescent moss which covers the walls of a few
humid caves. It is believed that this light is emitted by a fungus which
lives in symbiosis with the moss. What matters is the possibility to use
it to prepare a draught which gives a limited vision in the night. The
base of this concoction is the brown powder of a cinnamon stalk. In it
add a handfull of rosemary leaves, to make mind more attentive. In this
dry mixture put shreds of humidified phosphorescent moss, and mix
carefully the whole, until you get a phosphorescent liquid. When
quaffing it, you will feel more able to perceive your environment,
specially during in the darkness, thanks to the moss. A side effect of
its activity, as it draws its energy from your body, is to weaken you
for a while. The whole lasts for several days

## Shadows

In parallel to our world is the world of the Shadows, where undead and
lost souls walk. Potent magic can create gates to this world, and Sauron
the Necromancer has servants who live on the edge of the two worlds.
Other undead creatures, such as the skeletons animated by foul magic,
live also on this edge and their bones an be used as key for the Shadows
world. To concentrate the potency of these bones, you need to make a
base with the powder of a cinnamon stalk, mixed with a few rosemary
leaves which make the mind more receptive. Take then the dried rib bone
of a formerly undead corpse, break it in small pieces, and add it in the
crucible. Crush carefully the three ingredients with a mortar of white
marble, until an homogenous powder is obtained. Once slipped in a bottle
of water, you will have a potion which will give you access to the
shadow world for four nights.

## Skillful Oil

This oil, when made, will make the drinker limber and energetic, in
combat he or she will be more able than normal. The base for this recipe
is a tincture of oil. Add paprika for stimulation of the muscles, and
rose petals to warm them. A vanilla bean will cause the blood to
circulate more quickly, and two parts of rosemary will quicken the mind
and speed up reactions. The user must be warned; after the exertion, his
muscles will be tired and stiff for several hours.

## Soothing Draught

In the art of making a soothing draught, one must first make a base of
honey. Often honey comes in the form of honey-combs, which must first be
broken up into a thick pulp. Into that you must mix sage, for healing of
the wound, and thyme to prevent the infection and partially numb the
pain. Next, add a handful of blackcurrant so that the reagants can act
together, and finally add the petals of a water lily, so that the blood
may be purified and the wound may close. When this draught is swallowed,
for a while the recipient will experience a healing effect, and his
wounds will heal up. The fight against the infection will induce a
spiritual weakness for a short duration.

## Traveling

One who chooses to travel is greatly aided by this brew. It adds
endurance to the muscles, and speed to the legs. For all of the walkable
daylight, the imbiber will be able to travel farther and gain more
benefit from rest. This simple concoction is made by mixing in tarragon
leaves, to give spring to the step, ginseng root, to give energy to the
muscles, and clover, to aid the blood in its travels.

## Venom

Extremly lethal poisons can be prepared with natural ingredients found
in the wilderness. The following recipe uses the venom sack of the
feared rattlesnake. Make a base with the tail of an adult salamander.
Add a freshly butchered bat fur, to thicken the paste, and the small
venom sack of a rattlesnake. The resulting liquid will kill a cow in a
few minutes, and even the strongest fighter will risk death in a few
hours.

## Walking

One who chooses to walk between the towns of Eriador is greatly aided by
this draught. It adds endurance to the muscles and speeds the legs, for
the small cost of some loss in concentration and adress. To prepare this
brew mix a handfull of tonifiant juniper berries with some clover as a
base. Add a few crushed leaves of marjoram and freshly bought cloves, to
clean the blood of its toxines and stop cramps.