---
title: "Istari"
---

When the power of Sauron began to grow again in the Third Age, five
great Wizards arrived to combat the evil. Only three were ever known,
Saruman the White - the most powerful, and head of the Istari; Gandalf
the Grey, the wisest; and Radagast the Brown, the most at home with
Nature. Of the other two, Alatar and Pallando, very little has ever been
spoken.

Within MUME, there are theoretically an unlimited number of Istari, as
the Istar Quest is the route a player must take to reach immortality
\[see help ISTAR QUEST\] - as such, the istar is considered a
"proto-Ainur". The Istari levels are 23 to 25, with a good aligned level
25 istar being the Head of the Istari Council, the Tan Istar. It is the
purpose of the Istari in the game to help low level players, and this is
also the only way they can gain experience for themselves.

Istari should be there not only to help gain experience, but to advise
new players of simple rules, and to teach them the basics of gameplay.
It is not up to the Ainur to do this.

All Istari have a limit of ten years to prove their worth as an Istar.
What happens if the shamed Istar fails is unknown to mortals.

In the past the Valar have let many transgressions of our fledging
ainur, known as istar, go without reprimand or serious penalty. This
will not be the case any longer. Be aware that failure to adequately
complete all conditions of the quest will have serious ramifications.
The gift of Eru will be lost. This applies at all levels of the quest,
metamorph and istar.

See also: [Legend](Legend "wikilink"),
[Metamorph](Metamorph "wikilink"), [Ranger](Ranger "wikilink"), [Istar
Quest](Istar_Quest "wikilink"), [Rules-Istari](Rules-Istari "wikilink")