---
title: Justice
tags: ["Help files"]
---
Command **'justice**' allows you to read the justice
[board](board "wikilink") where punishments of cheaters are documented.
For the syntax of command 'justice', see 'help news'.

Following is a description of how [city](city "wikilink") **justice**
works in cities of [Arda](Arda "wikilink").

## Crimes

An action can be a crime only in a town or its immediate environs:

- Perjury (complaining about an innocent person).

<!-- -->

- Wandering with an unsheathed [weapon](weapon "wikilink") if you are
  not a town's [citizen](citizen "wikilink"). (This is not a crime in
  some towns.)

<!-- -->

- Using [magic](magic "wikilink") if you are not a citizen of the town.
  (This is not a crime in some towns.)

<!-- -->

- [Stealing](Steal "wikilink") from a [mobile](mobile "wikilink")
  citizen or a player.

<!-- -->

- Attacking a player (not wanted and not [Orc](Orc "wikilink")) or a
  mobile citizen.

<!-- -->

- Murdering a player (not wanted and not Orc) or a mobile citizen.

<!-- -->

- Summoning an aggressive mob into a town.

## Complain syntax

**IMPORTANT**

To see the crimes that you have witnessed, type "**complain**". (This
does *not* work while you are in the secretary's office - see below! You
have to go to a different room.) You will get a list of "Evidence"
saying what crimes you have witnessed.

You may *not* complain about anything that you have not witnessed unless
you want to be arrested yourself and charged with perjury! If it's not
in the "Evidence", don't complain about it!

For example, if a known [thief](thief "wikilink") is standing in the
room with you and you see that all your [gold](gold "wikilink") is
disappearing, but you have not actually *witnessed* it, you cannot
complain about it (without being charged with perjury).

Note that [death](death "wikilink") results in you forgetting the crimes
you have witnessed. So, you can *not* complain about someone's having
killed *you*, because it is no longer in your evidence!

- Complain about someone at the local secretary office in the town where
  the crime occurred with 'complain <person>' This will only work if you
  are a citizen of the town.

**Note:** Complaining about someone's crimes removes them from your
"Evidence". Therefore, if you make a mistake and complain someone TWICE,
the second time will be treated as perjury!

- 'complain <me>' always works. It is the only way to surrender when
  wanted. It is also the way to visit someone who is in
  [jail](jail "wikilink"). Note that you are going to complain only
  those of your crimes that have been already witnessed by the justice;
  others will still stay unreported and may get reported later, giving
  you a nasty surprise after you leave the jail!

<!-- -->

- Study the town's court board, at the secretary's office with
  'complain', 'complain wanted' or 'complain paid'.

**Note:** [Valar](Ainur "wikilink") do not need to be in the office and
may type:

`'complain [ `<town>` [ all | wanted | paid ] | `<someone>` ]'`

## Justice

The mobile citizens of a town complain of their crimes when they see a
guard. The complained person will be notified of his crime by the guards
and if he follows them, be judged. If he escapes, he will be wanted dead
or alive (preferably dead) in (and only in) the town and a reward will
be given to the player who kills him.

Notice that if you are wanted and stand in a room with a guard without
moving for a while, the guard will eventually arrest you. However, if
you try to escape justice by running around and not giving the guards a
chance to arrest you, you will eventually become wanted dead in the
town.

**IMPORTANT**

You are judged only for the crimes that were known when you were judged.
More crimes may be reported later, resulting in you getting jailed the
moment you get out of jail.

It is possible to escape a town's imprisonment:

1\) By killing all the witnesses of the crime before he is complained
about.

2\) By not being caught by the guards. Crimes have a lifetime that goes
from 1 real time day to 30 real time days.

3\) By being killed by somebody inside the town when wanted.

Note however that if you die not to a kill but to
[drowning](drowning "wikilink"), [climb](climb "wikilink"),
[poison](poison "wikilink"), etc., and/or outside the town where you are
wanted - the town will *not* forget that you are wanted there.

See also: [Citizen](Citizen "wikilink"), [Jail](Jail "wikilink")
