---
title: Locate
---

Syntax : cast 'locate' \[\<key\>\] \[\<max distance\>\] Type : Long
range Accumulative: N/A Duration : No Casting : Very long Position :
Standing Level : Level 6 Class : Magic User Min. Mana : 20 NOTE:
<max distance> is given in miles.

NOTE: In order to use this spell you must first find out the magical key
of the [object](item "wikilink"), [mobile](mobile "wikilink"), or
[room](room "wikilink") you are attempting to locate. (In the example
the magical key is the "zordurhozo" part).

The keys for objects, mobiles, and players can be obtained with the
[Identify](Identify "wikilink") spell.

NOTE: If you cast the Locate spell with no arguments, you will get the
magical key of the room you stand in. This key is needed when using the
[Teleport](Teleport "wikilink"), [Portal](Portal "wikilink"),
[Scry](Scry "wikilink") and [Watch Room](Watch_Room "wikilink") spells.

A comparison between '[Locate Life](Locate_Life "wikilink")' and
'LOCATE' (for locating mobiles): LOCATE LIFE: needs: name of creature
gives: nearby locations of the creature, and their teleport keys LOCATE:
needs: magical key of creature gives: graphical representation of those
locations in relation to you (but no detailed information or teleport
keys) Example: \> cast 'locate' zordurhozo

This spell can be learned from:

`                          Sessions `
[`Erestor`](Erestor "wikilink")`                          3`
[`Forlond Mage Guild`](Forlond_Mage_Guild "wikilink")`              16`
[`Lórien Mage Guild`](Lórien_Mage_Guild "wikilink")`               12`
[`Tharbad Mage Guild`](Tharbad_Mage_Guild "wikilink")`               3`

See also: [Locate Magic](Locate_Magic "wikilink")

[Category:Help files](Category:Help_files "wikilink") [Category:Mage
spells](Category:Mage_spells "wikilink")
[Category:Spells](Category:Spells "wikilink")