---
title: Lock picks
---

# Overview

**Lockpicks** improve your ability to [pick](pick "wikilink") a lock. In
game, lockpicks appear as **a set of lock picks** or alternatively **a
strange set of lockpicks** if they contain any improvement (see below).

They can be puchased in the Dwarven Homes in the [Blue
Mountains](Blue_Mountains "wikilink") (shop is accessible to
citizens/dwarves only) or in Tharbad's traveller's store. They may also
sometimes be found at other grocers / travelers shops if they got sold
there by a player and can also be found on certain mobs.

You can use them either by holding them, or wearing them on your belt,
or on a keyring that is worn on your wrist. If worn in any such way,
they will automatically be applied whenever you try to pick a lock.

<spoiler> Lockpicks add +25% pick skill and an additional +3% per
upgrade (these exact numbers needs to be confirmed). This is in addition
to any pick skill practiced. </spoiler>

# Improvements

Your lockpicks can be improved to work faster and better. Around
[Arda](Arda "wikilink") you will find people who can help you improve
your lockpicks, these are the ones found so far. In most cases you can
ask about lockpicks, and the mobile will begin talking. Once a set of
lockpicks has been improved, a new line will be added to their
description. To view this description - examine lockpicks.

<spoiler>

## Assassin Guildmaster

**Price:** 15 gold.

**Description:** Two of the lockpicks have shallow notches on them.

## Master Assassin

The Master Assassin will improve lockpicks as a reward to the person who
kills [Malardil](Malardil "wikilink") and brings the silver key to him.
Just approach the Master Assassin with the key in your inventory, give
him key after he asks for it, and remember to stay cool. Remember that
you must be neither invisible nor sneaking while passing doorguards and
entering MA. His reward is random: he always gives you 3 gold, then
sometimes he gives you small pouch of paralyse, sometimes offers you
picks upgrade (give him picks _after_ that). Btw it is also very easy
to steal his own picks after getting your picks upgrade or pouch ;) Like
80% steal needed.

**Price:** silver key

**Description:** A couple lockpicks have a small bump near the tip.

## Angdil

**Price**: an evil artifact weapon (HBM, ElfHewer, Morgul Blade, HFS,
Black Many-Tailed Whip) or Morgul Blade's sheath.

**Description:** The edges of most picks have been carefully sharpened.

## Dwarven Locksmith

This upgrade is only available to [dwarves](dwarf "wikilink"). You must
bring a piece of mithril to the lockpick selling Dwarf in [Blue
Mountains](Blue_Mountains "wikilink").

**Price:** pure Truesilver: a piece of mithril (silvery metal), mithril
key (Muranog cabinet) or fine chain piece. White chain doesn't fit!

**Description:** The lockpicks are extremely well tempered.

## Kraksh the Orcish Scout Guildmaster

This upgrade is only available to [orcs](orc "wikilink").

**Price:** a precious jewel (corberyl+ works, opal- doesn't, didn't
tested topaz).

**Description:** There is a strange lockpick, with a sharp protrusion on
one side.

## Grey Cloaked Man

This upgrade is only available to [Black
Numenoreans](Black_Numenorean "wikilink").

**Price:** oak staff from a slain whitie.

**Description:** The lockpicks feel oddly light in your hand.

## Half-elven cut-throat

To get upgrade, give lockpicks to him - no messages like "he starts
working on picks" or whatsoever. He does, and (btw) immediately! Kill
him (or steal) to get picks back. It's better to give him tons of picks
at one time - just to save yourself from excess trips to his hideout.

**Price:** Free.

**Description:** Several of the picks have long, smooth grooves along
their length.

## Saruman

**Price:** Give an item of power to [Saruman](Saruman "wikilink") (the
pick upgrade is random chosen from a set of possible rewards). Yerik
gives you NEW set of picks with his upgrade instead of upgrading your
existing set. Usually claymore should be fine to get picks.

**Description:** A finely shaped lockpick has been engraved with a white
hand.

</spoiler>

{% include Items.md %}

[Category: Miscellaneous
equipment](Category:_Miscellaneous_equipment "wikilink")