---
title: Moria
---

`  "Durin is the name that the Dwarves use for the eldest of the Seven`
`    Fathers of their race, and the ancestor of all the kings of the`
`    Longbeards. He slept alone, until in the deeps of time and the`
`    awakening of that people he came to Azanulbizar, and in the caves`
`    above Kheled-zaram in the east of the Misty Mountains he made his`
`    dwelling, where afterwards were the Mines of Moria renowned in`
`    song." `

Greatest of the Dwarf-halls, the mansion and folk-home of Durin's Folk,
was carved by Durin I early in the First Age in the caves overlooking
Azanulbizar. Here is located the tomb of Durin, and here dwelt the heart
of his people. Expanded many times, Khazad-dûm finally took up much of
the area beneath Barazinbar, Zirak-zigil, and Bundushathur. In the
Second Age a tunnel was built to Eregion making it the largest of all
Dwarven creations. Khazad-dûm consists of many large halls on a number
of levels, as well as mines and much more.

At the end of the [First Age](First_Age "wikilink"), the population of
Khazad-dûm was increased, as many skilled [Dwarves](Dwarf "wikilink")
from the Ered Luin came there after the ruin of Nogrod and Belegost.
Early in the Second Age, mithril was discovered in Khazad-dûm, and the
friendship between Durin's Folk and the [Noldor](Noldor "wikilink") of
[Eregion](Eregion "wikilink") began. The gates of Khazad-dûm were closed
during the War of Elves and Sauron, and thus the Dwarves survived
through the Second Age.

In TA 1980, the Dwarves, while extending their mithril-mine, relased a
great terror beneath Barazinbar. It was named Durin's Bane when the
following year it slew two Kings of Khazad-dûm. The Dwarves fled their
home never to permanently return. From this time, Khazad-dûm filled with
[orcs](Orc "wikilink"), [trolls](Troll "wikilink") and foul things. In
2790 Thror was killed by orcs in the city. This led to the War of the
Dwarves and Orcs, which ended in 2799 with the battle of Azanulbizar.
Despite the Dwarves' victory, Dain Ironfoot refused to re-enter
Khazad-dûm because of the presence of [Durin's Bane](Balrog "wikilink").

As the Kingdom of the noblest Lord of the Seven Tribes, the city was
sculpted from rock and embellished by the finest hall-builders of their
day. Within its recesses, as well as discovering
[mithril](mithril "wikilink"), the "true-silver", Durin's Folk mined
precious jewels and metals. They built stairways to peaks touching the
stars, and to depths unknown and terrible. They erected spans across
bottom-less pits and enchanting canyons, and fashioned vaults in caves
larger than many citadels. Now its chambers are dark and its builders
are gone.

Huge and grand, forbidding and mysterious, shrouded by its very nature
and with the passage of time, this ancient underground Dwarf-city
remains one of the noblest creations in
[Middle-earth](Middle-earth "wikilink"). Many who seek to walk its paths
and exploit its untold riches feel the power of its plight and legacy,
and must endure visions and terrors beyond comprehension. Moria is both
beauty and death incarnate.

The Dwarvish kingdom of Khazad-dûm included Azanulbizar as well as the
halls within the mountains. The kingdom is called Phurunargian
("dwarf-delving") in Westron, though more commonly translated as
Dwarrowdelf. In Sindarin it was first named Hadhodrond
("Khazad-delving") but the more usual Elvish name, especially after the
freeing of Durin's Bane was Moria ("black-pit") from which Men derived
the names Black Pit, Black Chasm, and the Mines of Moria.

{% include Place.md %}

[Category:Locations](Category:Locations "wikilink")