---
title: Namechanges
---

After much deliberation among MUME Management on the subject of name
changes, ManwÃ« has written a policy for them. This means that if you
want a name change, check out this list, and don't ask if you shouldn't
be asking!

Name changes will be granted (or forced) under these conditions: 1) A
ridiculous name, completely out of context with MUME (e.g.., Spiderman,
LukeSkywalker, Saturn: \* Force name change sooner or later - Level 25
or under: Free - Level 26 or above: 2 levels 2) An offensive name
(USARocks, SwedenSucks, f\*\*\*, etc.): \* Obvious: Nuke the player,
even at level 100. \* Subtle (happens to be offensive in some local
language, or when read backwards on moonless nights, or...) - Level 25
or under: Forced name change, 1 level. - Level 26 or above: Forced name
change, 3 levels. \* Note, this does not mean we will be after everyone
to change all of your potentially offensive names now. 3) A
not-really-in-context name: \* Never force the name change. - Level 10
or under: Free. - Level 11: 1 level. - Level 12 to 25: 2 levels. - Level
26 or above: No way. 4) A newly immorted Maia who wants to look cooler:
\* No way. 5) A new Vala: \* Possibly. Come with a good reason.

These are the rules that Management will be following when it comes to
changing names, so don't bother asking 5 different V+ in hopes of a
different verdict.

The MUME Management

SOURCE: NEWS 1828 posted Feb 24, 2002 by Alkar.

NOTE: The list of namechanges made during the introduction of [MUME
VII](MUME_VII "wikilink") can be found at
[Oldnames](Oldnames "wikilink").

[Category: Help files](Category:_Help_files "wikilink")