---
title: New Hero Guide (Welcome to level 21)
---

**Guide to New Heros**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

“It's a dangerous business, Frodo, going out your door. You step onto
the road, and if you don't keep your feet, there's no knowing where you
might be swept off to.”

Gandalf, JRRT, The Fellowship of the Ring

At level 21 you are now considered a "Hero". You get access to several
options in the game you do not get at lower levels. This guide is here
to help under stand levels and access to some of the games features.

A majority of this information applies to the Free Peoples, only some of
it also applies to Sauron's minions. For example orcs cannot become a
Maia or make a focus, but they get titles.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**hero**.

# Level Ranges and Who Command

Levels of the game are placed into different ranges. Using the who
command you can see players listed that are currently playing by their
level.

**newcomer** **newbie** - level 1 to level 12 You will show up under who
new. You will have hints turned on in the game. It is somewhat easier
for Rangers to assist you. To remove yourself from the newcomer list use
the command change newcomer.

**novices** - level 1 to level 12 You will show up under who novice. You
can choose to be a novice or newcomer with the change newcomer command.

**champion** - level 13 to level 20 you will show up under who champion.

**hero** - level 21 to level 25 you will show up under who hero

**legend** - level 26 to level 100 you will show up under who legend

At level 21, the Hero level, you gain access to more features and
options.

## Change Title

At level 21 you can now change your title. You can change your title
whenever you want as long as it falls in line with the games rules. Try
not to share restricted information in your title.

Please read:</br> **help change title**</br> **rules title**</br>

`change title I'm The Best Elf`

Elfplayer I'm the Best Elf

## Join the Ranks of the Rangers

After level 21 you can choose to participate in the group of MUME
volunteers that help new players, returning players, novices, and
newbies. These are the **Rangers** of MUME. Players that are offering to
help other players. You will show up on **who ranger**. So if you enjoy
helping others in the game, this might be a good option for you.

Rangers get some benefits to help make their job easier.

They can see what newcomers (lvl 1-12) are carrying to help them with
their gear, how to use shops, and what to wear, remove, or sell.

You also get a message if any one has made a new character, or if a
newbie has logged back into the game.

## Continuing to Level

After level 21 you can just keep leveling up! For levels 21 to 25 you
continue to level up as you have for the last 21 levels. You will get
full pracs for the next 4 levels. After you hit Legend you get much
restricted pracs, about one per level or so, but not always. The level
scaling power after **Legend** level drops significantly.

There is NOT 10 levels of raw power difference between a level 30 and a
level 40. It's more like about a 1.1 level difference.

So a level 31 in very good gear vs a level 40 in poor gear, the odds
will favor the level 31.

You will gain achievements for reaching level 21 and 26.

The level cap of the game is level 100.

## Legend Homes

After you reach level 30 you get the option to build a **legend home**
if you choose too. Most legend homes are in town areas in the game such
as Blue Mountains, Grey Havens, Fornost, Bree, Rivendell, and scattered
about the Shire. If you've gotten lost in an area of a town and found
many locked doors around you, you were probably in a legend home
neighborhood.

Legend homes are VERY EXPENSIVE and you've got to earn alot of gold to
make one. You get to pick the town you want it in, and the general
location for your legend home to be in that town, but you cannot place
them in places where it could give some players some game advantage.
Most cities have legend home 'neighborhoods' or areas where they can be
built.

One of the benefits of legend homes is it can offer somewhat lower rent
the other inns, and you get option to upgrade them and write the
descriptions in them.

Please read the following:</br> **help legend homes**</br> **help legend
home prices**</br> **help legend home locations**</br> **help legend
home instructions**</br>

If interested go out and gain some levels and A LOT OF GOLD (100's of
gold needed). Some cities are some what racists as to who can build
there.

There are legend home offices in: Grey Havens, Rivendell, Shire MD,
Bree, Blue Mountains, and Fornost.

## Access to Immortal Maia Quest

At level 21 you gain the option to attempt the quest to become an Istari
and later a Maia. Being an **Metamorph** or **Istari** is a 5 level long
quest, to eventually become a Maia. As a Maia you gain access to
features of the game like other boards to read and a chance to "peer
behind the curtain" at some of the management of the game.

As a Maia you can choose to get involved in the building and writing of
the game.

You'll want to read up on the following help files:</br> **help istari
quest**</br> **help metamorphs**</br> **help istari**</br> **help
maiar**</br> **view wizlist**</br> **help building**</br>

You are never required to participate in the Istari/Maia quest at
anytime. You can choose to participate in it after level 21 if you want
to.

You can immediately log into the game as your Maia after playing any
characters. There is no wait time.

But there is a 30 minute wait time to log in after you have been on as a
Maia. This helps prevent some cross-war communications and knowledge.

## Legend Focus

Crafting powerful magical items is spread out across many of Tolkien's
works. In MUME one option of it is opened up at level 21. You can now
craft a legend **focus** item. This guide will cover some of the basics
here. You can only have ONE focus item per character at a time. If you
make another one, your old focus no longer works. If you drop below
level 21, you have to level back up for your focus to work properly
again.

There are several different types of **focus** items to make.

**staff** - a great item for casters of any type. You can hold it like
Gandalf did in the movies and use it somewhat like a shield, or wield it
two handed and use it as a smiting weapon. But it's greatest gifts are
in casting spells more efficiently. It is also a permanent light source.

You can also enhance staves by embedding precious metals and gems in to
them to improve them or give them more abilities. The precious metals
improve the PB of the staff if used as a staff or held as a shield. They
also improve the OB if wielded as a weapon. See **help embed**.

**sapphire rings** - these are a variety of rings that can provide a
boost to OB, DB, or both. There is also an option to slightly improve
spell power and spell defense. Many warriors in the game use these
rings, as do some archers, scouts, and thieves.

**helmet** - an ancient helm can be made into a foci helmet, it provides
some of the benefits that legend staves do, but frees up your hands so
you can still wield what you want, hold a shield of your choice, and
bash. Some combo characters like this foci. You can also embed one gem
in a helmet.

**pale blue stone** - this legend focus can give you a special type of
heal once per MUME day. It refreshes your hit points, mana, and movement
points. Somewhat like a really really good cure serious spell... but on
every thing. It is worn in a necklace slot. There is also a weaker pale
blue stone that is a magical item, but not a focus item. It also cures
hits, mana, and moves, but not nearly as well as the focus version of
the pale blue stone.

**phial** - there are 3 types of this focus item. They all are worn as a
necklace, are a permanent light source, give you benefits resisting
spells, and a permanent protection from evil spell. They also come with
an additional ability depending on which type of phial you choose to
make, when you use it.

In order to make any of the focus items, you need to visit Grey Havens
to ask Cirdan for access to the white ship that sails to Valinor.
Valinor is where you will perform the "create focus" ritual. You must
have all of the items and ingredients to make the focus and those must
be blessed by the bless spell; anyone can cast it on them for you. Every
focus requires a blue crystal from the supermob Willow in the Old Forest
near the Shire. They also require other materials you'll need to
collect, depending on the focus you want to make.

Please read up on the following files:</br> **help focus**</br> **help
staff**</br> **help create focus**</br> **help embed**</br>

One feature that ALL of the legend focus items can do is they can call a
**Great Eagle** too you.

Sauron's forces do not get access to making a legend focus and instead
can corrupt different items in the game and turn them to their own evil
uses. See **help corrupt**.

## Great Eagles and Fell beasts

**Great Eagles** are based off Tolkiens eagles in the books, that give
Gandalf a ride a few times and even help out others like dwarves and
hobbits on a quest. Fell Beasts are based off of the mounts of the
flying Nazgum or Nine Black Riders.

After level 21, you might be able to make a focus item that allows you
to call a Great Eagle. Great Eagles can fly you over many zones, like
from GH to Bree, or Fornost to Tharbad in one fairly fast flight. Flight
time is less then a couple of minutes and the flight itself takes no
moves.

But here's a few things to keep in mind if you are lucky enough to be
able to call a **Great Eagle**. You must have a legend focus item to
call an eagle. You cannot call them if you are below lvl 21 OR do not
have a focus item, crafted in Valinor. Any focus item will work, staves,
helmets, phials, rings, or stones.

Calling eagles takes alot of moves, so be well rested before you try it.
It will likely take over 70% of your moves to attempt it. Don't try it
twice, the second call will autofail. Basically your moves act like mana
to call the eagle, similar to a spell. Also it has a short delay while
trying to call out to the skies. Also, do not leave the room. The room
you call from is where the eagle will show up to help you.

If there is a minion of Sauron in the room, they will probably try to
kill your Great Eagle, which will auto fly away from you. Bye bye eagle.

You cannot call eagles in cities, caves, mines, tunnels, buildings, a
few heavy dense forests, inside protected areas, like Rivendell and
Lorien, or NO-PORT rooms. Please make sure you are outside of a town, in
a nice open plain, field, hills, or light forest area. It can take
easily up to 2 minutes for the eagle to get there. This time is called
"eagle anxiety". Because calling an eagle is sometimes NOT 100%
successful. Also there is an eagle calling cooldown. If you wait an hour
between calls, you should be fine to try again. If you call an eagle too
soon, it will fail. Moves wasted.

Great Eagles can carry up to 2 riders. The second rider does NOT have to
be over level 21, so you can fly a lower level friend with you on the
eagle. If 2 members in your group have a legend focus, you can fly a
group of 4 somewhere, etc...

Eagle flying distance is based off of zones. They can only fly so many
zones at a time. Sinda elves get a few bonus zones for eagle range, and
can fly further. If you'd like to check where an eagle can fly, when it
lands try this:

Whisper eagle assdkfsdlkfj.

That will cause the eagle to tell you the locations it can currently fly
to and reach from where you have called it.

A Great Eagle says 'I can take you to the Tower Hills, Isengard,
Fangorn, Lórien, Dunland, the Last Bridge, Rivendell, Ost-in-Edhil,
Eregion, the Old Forest, Shire, Weathertop, Moria, Greenway, Tharbad,
Fornost, or Bree.'

To get the eagle to take you where you want to go, **whisper eagle**
<location>:

`whisper eagle bree, whisper eagle fangorn, whisper eagle weathertop, whisper eagle fornost`

The eagles will never drop you off in town, but will drop you off a few
rooms outside, in a random open plains area.

Here is a list of some (not all) of the locations in MUME that Great
Eagle can fly too:

Tower Hills, Isengard, Fangorn, Lórien, Dunland, the Last Bridge,
Rivendell, Ost-in-Edhil, Eregion, the Old Forest, Shire, Weathertop,
Moria, Greenway, Tharbad, Fornost, Bree, Dol Guldur, Carrock, Lórien

**Fell Beasts** pretty much operate the same way as Great Eagles. To
call a fell beast you must have a black amulet, which is made by
corrupting a red amulet. Fell Beasts are only for Tarkhnarb orcs and
Morruhk orcs and Black Númenóreans. Fell beasts mostly fly to locations
somewhat nearish the Misty Mountains, and other areas where the forces
of Sauron often hold sway. Black Númenóreans get a few bonus zones to
their flying distance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")

[Category:Guides](Category:Guides "wikilink") [Category:Newbie
Help](Category:Newbie_Help "wikilink")