---
title: "Newbie Guide to Ranger Skills"
---

Newbie Guide to Ranger Skills

"There is something strange at work in this land. I distrust the
silence. I distrust even the pale Moon. The stars are faint; and I am
weary as I have seldom been before, weary as no Ranger should be with at
clear trail to follow."

Aragorn, The Two Towers

This guide is all about practicing and the different guilds in the game.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at:

`   MUME Help files`

Bold words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help bandage
or ride.

This guide of Ranger skills will try to expand upon the MUME help files
for Ranger skills and give suggestions for practicing Ranger skills.
Suggestions will be given for different types of classes, levels, and
character builds. As with any advice or suggestions, some players may
have other suggestions or disagree. There really is no one right way to
practice skills for every playing style.

If you happen to practice some of these skills, and think you've made a
mistake, don't worry. This game has couple of ways to get your practices
back and try something else.

Please see the Newbie Guide to Practicing for more tips or information.

Ranger Skills

Ranger skills are more about exploration, travel, and survival than
combat. But some ranger skills do come in very handy to find or avoid
combat. Those with well rounded ranger skills will tend to thrive in the
wilds and gain travel points (tps) easier.

Check out this Guide to Travel Points link to travel points

A nice feature of Ranger skills is that they do not count against you
for cross class practicing. Anyone can practice any Ranger skills
without having to worry about affecting their skills or percentages in
any other classes.

Ranger Skills for Travel and Exploration

Climb

Some exits in the game are climbable exits. You can choose for your
climb to be always on, but can also shut it off, so you will not attempt
to climb those exits. Climb safe means you will attempt to climb any
exit where you do not have a chance of falling down. Climb always means
you'll risk climbing on some exits that you could fall down, and
potentially take some damage. Climb is also a good way to get a few more
tps here and there.

prompt

There is rope in the game that can help you climb down some exits
safely. Rope can also be useful to help those who are following behind
you to climb exits.

Climb commands:

climb always, climb safe, climb off, tie rope down, prompt

Practicing suggestions: If you are leading a group in mountains or other
climb heavy areas, you want a high climb, say 80%-100%. Also if you want
to use Climb to occasionally escape from PK or pursue someone in PK in
some areas, a climb skill of 80%+ is needed. If you just want access to
a few rooms here and there for exploring, getting tps, or to perhaps
prevent some falling damage occasionally, 50% should suffice. That will
give you access to all of the easier to climb areas in the game.

Abilities required: Dexterity, Willpower, Strength

Ride

Travelling in MUME is much more efficient with a mount. Your moves will
last much longer, you can travel further, and have more moves left over
incase of an emergency. Practicing Ride allows you to use your movement
points wisely.

If you have low Ride skill, it increases your chance of falling off of
your mount. If you do fall off your mount, in MUME often referred to as
a ZBLAM!, there is a delay of remounting. More Ride practiced means less
falling off your mount, and faster remounting speeds if you do fall off.
Your mount will also refuse to listen to movement commands as it begins
drop in movement points.

With higher Ride you can ride your mount down to lower moves, like tired
or slow, before the mount refuses your demands. More Ride practiced
means less falling off your mount, and faster remounting speeds if you
do fall off.

` You can also examine your mount and see an estimate of how many`

moves it has left.

Prompt

Ride commands:

ride, dismount, lead, abandon, ride behind, exam <mount>, saddle
<mount>, unsaddle

Practicing suggestions: For general road travel between cities, look to
get a Ride skill of at least 60%-70%. If you are riding away from PK or
pursuing in PK, you want a ride skill of 90%-110%.

Abilities required: Dexterity, Willpower

Swim

Swimming can help you escape foes, find more tps, and get access to some
more difficult rooms in the game. Surface swimming is much safer the
underwater swimming. You can easily drowned trying underwater swimming.
Surface swimming costs moves, but as long as you have some moves left,
it can be fairly safe. If you are swimming with low moves, you can start
to choke on water.

To use a canoe or boat, you do not need any ranks in Swim. You can cross
most all surface water rooms in the game (a few are rapids, or don't
allow a boat). But canoes and boats do have a very heavy weight, and are
difficult to carry. Which can have an impact on your moves, DB, and
fleeing. But if you want to save some pracs on Swim, canoes and boats
are an option.

Prompt

Swim commands:

swim on, swim off, get canoe, drop raft

Practicing suggestions: If you plan on swimming to escape or pursue PK,
you want a high Swim, 80%-100%. If you plan on doing alot of exploring
underwater, 90%-100%+. If you are just trying to occasionally cross a
stream or river, or not drown if you fall into a river, a Swim of
40%-50% should help you survive. If your Swim is below 40%, try to avoid
any underwater rooms. It is possible to drown.

Abilities required: Constitution, Willpower, Dexterity

Wilderness

The Wilderness skill covers several different aspects of your character.
One feature you'll notice is it reduces your need for food and water. So
you do not need to drink or eat as often. Players with very high
Wilderness can go for 2 days without needing to eat or drink. The higher
the Wilderness, the more you'll notice this effect.

Wilderness also reduces the time delay for building campfires. With high
Wilderness, you can build campfires very quickly. This can be useful for
cooking food, making crude torches or getting the resting bonus called
-comfortable.

Check out this guide to campfires for more information. link guide to
campfires

Wilderness can also help you become a little more efficient in using up
your movement points in very difficult or rough terrain. So dense
forests, mountains, swamps, etc.., you might notice your movement points
last just a little bit longer. This doesn't really affect movement on
roads or in cities.

Wilderness commands and related commands:

camp, cover campfire, get torch fire, cook raw, rest

Practicing suggestions: Most thieves, scouts, archers, and warriors get
Wilderness pretty high, 80%-100% Some combo characters find that 50%
Wilderness is enough. Some casters use spells in place of Wilderness,
like create food, create water, and breath of briskness, instead of
getting Wilderness high %.

Abilities required: Strength, Willpower

Ranger Skills for Protection and Recovery

Awareness

All characters have the ability or stat of Perception, to notice
sneaking or hidden threats, but those that practice Awareness are better
at it. Awareness increases the chance of you to seen sneaking and hidden
mobs. This can somewhat protect you against mobs trying to pickpocket
you or attempting a backstab. You have a higher to chance to know they
are there, or to sense the pickpocket or backstab. It is not immunity to
pickpocket or backstab, but reduces the chances of those being
successful against you. It also helps when hunting mobs that can sneak.
You can also notice mobs in fog better then those without Awareness.

If you practice Awareness to 95%, it comes with a skill mastery called
Night Vision. This does not give you amazing, see anything in an unlit
room powers. But you can see what mobs are in a dark room, or react to
them attacking you. So it does help when you are without a light, but is
not all powerful. Some sneaky archers or backstabbers find this useful.
Some mobs cannot see in the dark, and may not know you are there.

The Awareness skill has no commands that are used.

Practicing suggestions: Many thieves, scouts, and archers practice this
skill quite high, some of them to the 95% to gain the Night Vision
effect. If you practice Awareness over 40%-50% you will notice a
increase to the sneaking mobs you now see much more often, such as
moles, thieves, brigands, scouts, shadows, etc... Other characters try a
few practices in Awareness if they have some to spare, but are not sure
where else to put them.

Abilities required: Perception, Intelligence

Bandage

During combat in MUME, you can receive wounds from some hits. Light
wounds do not bleed, but any deeper wounds do bleed, every minute.
Wounds can also get dirty or infected, which means they can take a
longer time to heal, and can advance to a worse wound category. Having
one light wound isn't very much of a threat, have 2 deeper wounds can
start to severely hamper your character. Deeper wounds also come with
penalties to your abilities or statics, so you can actually lose some
OB, DB, Strength, Dexterity, Intelligence, and so on.

Using the Bandage skill can clean a wound if it is dirty, and bandage it
up so it is no longer bleeding or getting worse. It also helps the
healing rate of the wound. If you fail the bandage attempt, you can
cause the wound to do some small amount of bleed damage.

There are 3 different tiers of a bandage you can tie: poorly bound,
bound up, and securely bound.

Wounds that are poorly bound, can have the bandage simply fall off, and
you start bleeding again or getting the wound dirty. Bandages also have
a chance to fall off in combat, but poorly bound tend to fall off much
more often. Bound up or securely bound wounds the bandage tends to stay
on better, and can even help out the recovery rate a little bit.

If a character is dying or incapacitated and you successfully use the
Bandage skill on them, they improve to Awful hit points. This will save
their life and keep them from dying. It acts as a very weak cure spell.

` It is challenging to time this, but could end up saving their life.`

Unfortunately you cannot use Bandage during combat or on anyone in
combat.

Bandage does not help treat diseases or poisons.

Check out the guide to Wounds link to wounds

Bandage commands: bandage

Practicing suggestions: Many different characters get some Bandage to
not suffer from wounds. If all you want is some Bandage to survive, look
for 30%-35%. This will lead to more poorly bound wounds and a chance to
fail the Bandage attempt. But can still save you from bleeding out or
the wound from progressing and getting worse. If you want more reliable
first aid, try for 50% Bandage, you'll succeed more and reduce the
chance for poorly bound wounds. If you really want to be a combat medic,
at 65% Bandage on up, you'll succeed very often, and really increase the
chance of getting a securely bound wound.

Abilities required: Intelligence, Dexterity

Ranger Skills for Grouping and Pets

Command

Command commands: If you use order followers all pets, charmies, and
familiars will perform the command. Or you can order 1 charmie at a
time. order followers rest order followers stand order followers assist
order falcon sleep order falcon flee order falcon kill mouse

Practicing suggestions: If you are attempting to control 2 pets or low
level charmies, Command of 50%-55% should be enough, say using 2 falcons
from the pet shop for parry split. If you are planning on being a
"charming" caster, you'll want to go for 100%.

Abilities required: Intelligence, Willpower

Leadership

This skill has 2 features, both of them only used in groups, and only
while you are leading the other group members. Leadership works for
other characters following you in the game, but also pets, mounts,
charmies, and mercenaries. Leadership reduces the amount of 'group
noise' you make by walking from room to room. The larger the group, the
more noise you make, and the further away you can hear them moving
around. The more Leadership you have, the more you reduce this noise
made, maybe even down to none.

The second feature of Leadership is to reduce the amount of 'group lag'
you have while walking around. If you have groups larger then 3, you
will notice your moving from room to room will have a delay. Leadership
reduces this delayed time while moving rooms, down to none if you have
enough Leadership practiced.

Leadership commands: group

follow

Practicing suggestions: Many characters don't practice this skill at
all. Some players do much more following then leading and really don't
need this skill much. If you do plan on leading groups often, you will
find some benefit. If leading a group of 3, 25%-30% in the skill will
help well. Group of 4 look for 45%-50%. If leading groups larger then
that try for 75%-90%. This also counts for leading mounts, pets,
charmies, or mercenaries, not just other players.

Abilities required: Willpower, Wisdom

Ranger Skills for Hunting

Track

One function of Track is to help you in areas with random exits. The
higher your Track skill is, some random exits will become less random.
It is still a random exit, but your chance of going the correct way
increases with % in Track. This Track function works much better in the
daylight.

The main uses of Track is to see what or who has been travelling in your
room recently. And if you want, you can follow the tracks of a mob or
character. If you just type track, you will see what's been travelling
recently in that room.

If you type track <target>, like track wolf, track orc, track elf, you
will see the tracks for that target and then be able to follow it to the
next room. It will give you a hint of which direction they went. If you
use the pursue command, you will follow the tracks until you find the
target or lose the tracks.

Tracks fade over time as they get old. If you have a higher Track %
practiced, you will be able to find older tracks more often. Tracks also
fade faster in some types of weather, such as rain or snow. Tracks from
a target who is bleeding are easier to find. Some types of terrain are
easier to follow tracks. Tracking in a tunnel or on mountains can be
more difficult then tracking on the plains for example.

You cannot track on open water or underwater. You can possibly track
over ice, if your Track skill is high enough. It takes a Track of % to
track on ice.

Track skill cannot help you see hiding targets, but it can help you find
the room that they are hiding in.

Several types of MUME's creatures do not leave tracks. Most fly mobs,
fish, and spirit like undead such as shadows, do not leave tracks.
Characters who are riding do not leave tracks, but the mount you are
riding does leave tracks. Shrouded or sneaking characters still leave
tracks.

Track commands: where stag, where wolf, where elf, track, track stag,
track wolf, track orc, pursue, pursue troll

Practicing suggestions: If you are planning to PK, you'll need high
Track, 85%-100% If you are using Track defensively or vs mobs, 45%-60%
should help.

Abilities required: Perception, Intelligence