---
title: Newbie Guide to Suits of Armour and Shields
---

**Newbie Guide to Suits of Armour and Shields**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

"‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what the hammer and
anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at all.’
Gently he stripped off Frodo’s old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a
gasp of wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corset shimmered before his
eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it off and
held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars, and the sound of
the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a pool."

JRRT, The Fellowship of the Ring

This guide is about using suits of armour, shields, and other equipment
to protect yourself.

Many parts of this guide reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like **help
states**.

# **Finding Armour**

One way to find armour or upgrade your armour is to take it off of
corpses of mobs you defeat. If the corpse has a better shield then you
do, take it! You earned it. But there is a chance that shield will not
be the right size for you. Then you need to take it back to town and
resize it at a armourer. This will cost a small amount of coins, but the
armour will then fit you after that.

If you find armour that loads in the room or in a chest, it is called
"unsized", and anyone can pick it up and wear it. The moment you wear
it, that armour is now YOUR size. Anyone else wanting to use it later
may have to resize it so it will fit them.

You also might find armour upgrades sold in a armourer shop. Just type
**list** to see everything the shop has for sale. Or you can narrow your
search down. Like list shield, list fine leather, list chainmail, list
worn on head, etc... In shops the armour is listed from the best
condition to the worst condition for each type of armour sold there. It
is very normal for players to **sell** armour in a shop for making gold,
and to **buy** armour in the shop for upgrading their gear.

You can also use the **compare** command for armour you are wearing OR
armour for sale in a shop, OR both options. This is a wonderful command
and pretty easy to learn how to use it.

`sell, buy, value, list, show, compare, consider, resize`

There are some other armours in this game, that are semi artifacts or
extremely rare and very difficult to get, this guide will not be
focusing on them.

# **Maintain your Armour**

Your armour will slowly get beat up, worn out, and damaged over time as
you wear it in combat. As the armour gets more damaged, the amount of
future damage it can absorb decreases. You can type **equ** or **inv**
to see the condition of the armour you have. You can also type **con**
breastplate or **con** leggings to see what the condition of that
specific piece of armour is. Then you can **compare** it to the list in
the **help states** list.

One easy way to think of it is that pieces of armour have hit points,
and as they absorb damage during being hit in combat, they get hurt.
Eventually they absorb so much damage that they need mended or repaired
to be 'healed' or restored back to full hit points. Over time in the
game they get worn down, and their 'full hit points' actually decreases.
Meaning they will need to be mended more often for top performance and
protection.

If your armour is getting worn down, you can visit a armourer shop and
have it mended. This does cost some coins to do so, but it will repair
your armour back to it's top damage absorbing potential. It takes a few
minutes for your armour to be repaired in the shop. And you only have
about 10 or so minutes to come back to the shop to get your armour back.
If you forget to return to the shop, the armourer puts your armour up
for sale. As soon as you enter the room, the armourer will give you all
of your mending pieces back, in full repaired condition. You can
**mend** more then one piece of armour at a time, to speed this process
up. Like mend all.chain.

# **Wearing Armour**

This is a list of what types of gear is worn in which slots. For more
information try **help wear**.

- On head - cap, hat, hood, helm, helmet, coif, crown, circlet
- On neck - ruby, necklace, amulet, collar, scarf, chain, cloakpin,
  pendant, brooch
- On body - shirt, vest, tunic, jerkin, dress, blouse, robe,
  breastplate, hauberk
- On arms - sleeves, vambraces, wrapping
- On wrist - bracelet, wrist guard, wristband, keyring
- On hands - gloves, gauntlets
- On waist - belt, sash, girdle
- On legs - pants, trousers, skirt, leggings, greaves
- On feet - boots, shoes, sandals, slippers
- Across back - rope, quiver, bolt case, sheath, harness, baldric,
  satchel, backpack
- About body - cloak, surcoat, cape, cassock, fur, coat, blanket, pelt

# **Mixing Suits of Armour**

You can mix and match armour all you want in MUME. You can wear a soft
cap, a fine metal breastplate, soft leather gloves, scale mail leggings,
and cotton sleeves if you want too. There is no bonus or penalty to
wearing complete suits of armour. But overall if you want high absorb,
you'll want to go with a full suit of fine chainmail or fine metals.

If you do mix armours, and wear a 'lighter' piece of armour, you will
notice over time that spot on your body tends to get targeted more in
fights and might receive more light wounds.

A very classic example of this is a warrior in a full suit of metal
armour... except the comfortable soft leather boots on his feet (helps
with running around). Then in combat that warrior notices they get hit
in the feet more often for more wounds, and over all more damage,
because they do not have high damage absorb armour protecting their
feet.

# **Armour Protections**

There are some types of damage armour can help you with and some types
of damage it cannot. This is a list of those situations.

Armour cannot protect you from the following types of damage:

- bleeding damage (use **Bandage** skill)
- poison damage
- damage from spells or spell like attacks (burning hands spell or an
  eel's electrical shock)
- falling damage (like from a trap or breakaway bridge or cliff)
- some traps in the game
- falling off a horse (ZBLAM! try learning more **Ride** skill)
- falling due to failed climb attempts (get a rope or learn more
  **Climb** skill)
- Bash skill does a small amount of damage that armour does not absorb
- room damage (some rooms are on fire or very cold and can do minor
  damage)
- drowning damage (get a boat or learn more **Swim** skill)
- some attacks that do not focus on a hit location on body

Armour can protect you from the following types of damage:

- location attacks that hit a specific part of your body
- opening some damaging doors that are thorny/sharp

# **Explaining Armour Numbers**

There are several numbers that help you to understand what your armour
is doing for you and too you. Here are some of the ways you can
understand a suit of armour better. There really is not a best armour in
the game, but the armour that works well for what you want it to do.

### **Weight**

If you type **con** <armour> you will get information about how heavy it
is. There is no limit to what armour you can wear due to your Str or
Con. But if your character is carrying too much weight, it WILL lower
your DB, decrease your chance to flee, and increase the rate you use up
your movement points. So Str is related somewhat to how heavy of armour
you can wear, effectively or efficiently. Con is related to how many
movement points you have and how fast those movement points regen.
Lighter armour helps with movement but heavier armour helps with
absorbing damage.

### **Stat Adjustments**

Some armours you can wear might increase your OB, DB, or PB. Some
armours you wear might lower your OB, or DB. Type stat before you wear
the armour, then type stat again after you wear it. You will be able to
see the differences if your OB, DB, or PB changed. Over all heavier
armours tend to lower DB and OB some, and lighter armours can raise it
some.

- Armour penalties go from none to some: cloth -\> leather -\> chain -\>
  metal

<!-- -->

- Armour penalties also decrease as you go from: 'plain' -\> sturdy -\>
  fine

### **Price/Cost**

Generally armour that is heavier tends to sell more or cost more.
Armours that are light tend to sell for less and cost less. The
condition of the armour affects the price as well. If the armour is worn
down or very old, it's value in a shop will drop.

Armour prices from cheap to expensive:

- cloth -\> leather -\> chain -\> metal

<!-- -->

- 'plain' -\> sturdy -\> fine

### **Spell Defense**

Some rare armour, shields, or cloaks can also increase your resistance
to magic. This increases your chance to save against a spell. The spell
has a slightly higher chance of failing or doing less damage.

### **Moves**

This is specifically for any boots or shoes. Very comfortable boots help
you to use less moves, or use up your movement points more efficiently.
Boots that are very heavy or more uncomfortable are not as efficient,
and you can use up some moves faster. But there is a trade off. Boots
that are better for moves are not very good armour. Boots that are
heavier make better armour and have more absorb. Warriors tend to wear
heavier, protective footware. Other classes tend to wear boots that are
efficient for moves.

- Movement efficiency good to poor: cloth -\> soft leather -\> rigid
  leather -\> metal

<!-- -->

- Feet protection from good to poor: metal -\> leather -\> cloth

A few warriors even carry a change of shoes in a backpack to switch when
travelling.

Some examples of comfortable footware are:

- fine soft leather boots, black padded boots, smooth black boots, shoes

Some examples of uncomfortable footware are:

- snowshoes, heavy shoes, metal boots

### **Absorb**

Armour has two values that relate to combat: percent of damage absorbed,
and maximum amount of damage absorbed. This is best understood through
an example:

You are wearing a piece of armour on your body that absorbs 50% of
damage, up to 6 points, and a piece of armour on your legs that absorbs
75% of damage, up to 4 points.

A mob hits you in the body, doing 10 damage. Because the armour on your
body absorbs 50%, it tries to stop 5 points of this damage. Since the
maximum it can stop (6 points) is higher than 5 points, the armour
absorbs 5 points, and you take 5 points of damage.

The mob then hits you very hard on the leg, doing 20 damage. Your leg
armour tries to absorb 75% of this, which would be 15 points. However,
your leg armour can absorb a maximum of 4 points of damage. Since the
damage it tries to absorb is higher than the damage it can absorb, it
will stop as much as it can (4 points), the rest goes through, and you
take 16 points of damage.

The Armour value that you see when using the STAT command shows the
average percentage of absorption your armour provides (this is the
average for all places you could be hit; if you have better armour on
one spot, it will obviously stop more damage). The Armour value DOES NOT
give you any indication of the maximum amount of damage that is absorbed
from each hit. So wearing chain mail armour will give you a lower Armour
value than wearing fine rigid leather armour, even though chain mail
will absorb more total damage.

`Disclaimer some of this absorb information came from other players, and they described it or said it well, I could not improve upon it, so I borrowed it for this guide. Thank you! p(Argor), p(Androg), p(Belond)`

# **Quality of Armour**

Several types of armour in MUME come in different tiers or quality. As
the quality goes up the value of numbers also goes up, in your favor.
Higher quality armour gets more expensive, maybe lighter, better
protection, less stat penalties, and often harder to find. Simply put,
'fine' armour is better then 'plain' or 'sturdy'.

To help upgrade your character, you want to strive to find the 'fine'
armour and sell or replace your 'sturdy' armour. Fine armour tends to be
much more rare on mobs, but check armour shops regularly.

The following suits of armour follow this trend:

- soft leather
- rigid leather
- chain mail
- metal

The pattern for armour improving is 'regular' or 'plain', then sturdy,
then fine.

- 'regular' -\> sturdy -\> fine

Here are some examples of this pattern for actual armour in the game:

- Soft leather boots -\> Sturdy soft leather boots -\> Fine soft leather
  boots

<!-- -->

- Rigid leather trousers -\> Sturdy rigid leather trousers -\> Fine
  rigid leather trousers

<!-- -->

- Chainmail sleeves -\> Sturdy chain mail sleeves -\> Fine chain mail
  sleeves

<!-- -->

- Metal breastplate -\> Sturdy metal breastplate -\> Fine metal
  breastplate

# **Skills and Armour**

There is not alot in the game that skills can help with for armour.
Here's some suggestions that pair well with using alot of heavy armours.

### **Wilderness**

This skill can help you use moves more efficiently in wild rooms, like a
dense forest, or hills. Wearing armour can be tiring, so this skill
might help your moves last a little longer. You can also build campfires
faster to rest at for more movement regen.

### **Parry**

If you are trying to be hit less, then ranks in the parry skill will
help. Parry also stacks with wearing a shield for better parry. For
every 5% you practice in Parry skill, your PB goes up by 1%. So if you
practice 50% Parry, your PB is +10%. Then if you wear a shield that has
+20% PB on it, your parry now rises to +30%.

### **Dodge**

When wearing heavy armour or carrying a heavy shield, it is possible
that your DB could drop from either the weight OR from the DB penalty
the armour has. Practicing the Dodge skill is a way to get some DB back.
If you only practice it to like 25-30% it will not hurt your warrior
skills. For every 5% you practice in Dodge, you get +1% DB.

### **Endurance**

This skill slightly increases your max movement points and slightly
increases your movement regen. This is very important in heavy armours
as you will use up your movement points faster. One of the most
important skills when it comes to heavy armour and shields. It also
slightly increases your hit points and hit point regen, possibly putting
you back in the fight faster.

# **Suits of Armour**

There are several types of suits of armour to choose from in MUME. This
guide will attempt to provide a description of possible sets and the
pros and cons of each type. Also which types of classes often choose to
wear them.

Some suits of armour offer more protection, but are expensive and heavy.
Some are very light weight and cheap, but the protection is lacking.
There are many reasons to try out different suits of armour.

## **Cloth**

- Classes: casters, scouts, thieves, archers

<!-- -->

- Cost: very cheap to buy, mend, resize, or rent, often costing less the
  a couple of silver

<!-- -->

- Stats: very light weight, raises your DB, no absorb

<!-- -->

- Protection: only increased DB, no absorb

<!-- -->

- Examples: plain hood, green shirt, grey pair of pants, cotton sleeves

Cloth armour is very affordable, being the cheapest in the game. You can
buy or loot it almost anywhere. It is the lightest armour in the game,
and being light weight does not hurt your DB, flee chances, or use up
movement points faster. It does have the draw back of if you are hit,
you are likely to really notice it, since it has no absorb. It is meant
for avoiding blows, not absorbing blows. It can be worn with any Str or
Con.

It does pair very well with the Shield and Armour spells, which casters
use. For backstabbers being light weight helps your moves last longer,
and seems to help backstab chances very slightly. For shooters, you are
likely to be hit less, so interrupts less shots.

There is also some cloth armour that makes you effective vs cold, which
means it can help resist getting the flu. Like a warm blanket, scarf,
wool coat, or wool tunic.

There are some 'magical' cloth choices that robes that help with your
spell defense slightly or sleeves that can make you resistant to
poisons. But those are much more difficult to get.

## **Leather**

- Classes: scouts, thieves, defense warriors, low level warriors,
  armoured casters

<!-- -->

- Cost: cheap to buy, mend, resize, or rent, often costing less then 1
  gold for a full suit

<!-- -->

- Stat: light weight, doesn't hurt stats, good low damage absorb

<!-- -->

- Protection: fine rigid leather good absorb vs lower level mobs, soft
  leather poor

<!-- -->

- Examples: fine soft leather gloves, fine rigid leather gloves, fine
  rigid leather boots

Leather suits of armour are split up into 2 major groups, soft leather
and rigid leather. There are a few other items here and there as well.
Leather armour is fairly light weight, very affordable, and does not
come with very many negative side affects of wearing, like lower DB.

Over all soft leather is mostly used for fine soft leather boots (good
for moves) and fine soft leather gloves (good for OB). The rest of the
soft leathers are not really used by players because cloth or fine rigid
leather are better options. Soft leather can be worn with any Str or
Con.

Fine rigid leather is a really good choice for lower level thiefs and
warriors. It does not really negatively impact your character, and has
actually decent absorb against lower level mobs. It is not great for
trying to tank high level mobs like mountain trolls or cavebears. But
for general leveling up, it works -wonderful- against a pack of wolves,
giant rats, bandits, bats, etc... So if you are reequing or working on
saving up cash, this is an outstanding choice. Just don't try to tank
any supermobs with it. Rigid leather can be worn with almost any Str and
any Con.

## **Chain**

- Classes: defense warriors, low level warriors, armoured casters

<!-- -->

- Cost: somewhat cheap to buy, mend, resize, or rent, often costing less
  then 8 gold for a full suit

<!-- -->

- Stat: medium weight, slightly lowers stats, medium damage absorb

<!-- -->

- Protection: good absorb against low level and mid level mobs

<!-- -->

- Examples: fine chain mail coif, white chain mail sleeves, scale
  leggings, fine chain mail hauberk

Chain mail suits of armour include choices like fine chain, white chain,
and scale mail. Over all the scale mail is heavy, so most players switch
to something else as soon as they can afford it. A majority of players
use fine chain mail. White chain has slightly better absorb, but is MUCH
more expensive and heavier.

You'll need something else for your feet, as there are no chain mail
boots. Players often choose fine rigid leather boots or fine metal
boots. Chain mail armour can be worn with any medium Str or higher, and
a good Con helps.

This armour absorbs a medium amount of damage, and is middle line heavy.
So characters without max Strength can try and use it. If you wear a
full suit of cloth armour then switch to fine chain mail, you will
really notice a difference in how long your hit points last. Many lower
level warriors start out with fine chain because it is more affordable,
and later switch to other armour. Some mages use this type of armour
while tanking for charmies or using Quake spell.

## **Metal**

- Classes: tank warriors, battle clerics, some armoured casters

<!-- -->

- Cost: expensive to buy, mend, resize, or rent, often costing as much
  as 10 gold more more each

<!-- -->

- Stat: very heavy weight, lowers OB and DB, high damage absorb

<!-- -->

- Protection: great vs any mobs except some supermobs

<!-- -->

- Examples: full metal helmet, plate vambraces, fine metal gauntlets,
  fine metal greaves

Metal armour is what you will see most warriors wearing. This is very
high damage absorb. But it's also very heavy, lowers your DB and OB
some, and is expensive. There are some different choices, depending on
if you have max Strength or not. For example Plate is a little bit
lighter then full metal, with just slightly less absorb. Metal and plate
armour should be work by high Str and high Con characters.

# **Shields**

Shields provide protection in combat by helping to increase your Parry
Bonus (PB). The higher your parry is, the more attacks you might block.
However, your parry can be decreased with parry split (being attacked by
more then one mob). Shields are generally split up into three
categories. Some are lighter (for low Str characters) and some heavier
(for high Str characters).

If a shield is in very bad shape, it might not offer it's full PB bonus,
be sure to mend it to help.

Over all the heavier the shield is, the more PB it provides. This is
even true for the lighter shields.

Over all metal shields provide more PB then wooden shields, but wooden
shields tend to be lighter.

Parry bonus increasing trends from lighter to heavier:

- wooden -\> metal

<!-- -->

- target -\> small -\> large -\> full -\> large+full -\> wall -\>
  large+wall

Weight increasing trends from lighter to heavier:

- wooden -\> metal

<!-- -->

- target -\> small -\> large -\> full -\> large+full -\> wall -\>
  large+wall

So in summary, a small wooden target shield is very light weight and
very poor protection. A large metal wall shield is very heavy and great
parry protection.

## **Buckers**

These shields tend to be pretty light weight. You can wear them and
wield any weapon, but they are specifically designed to be used with two
handed smiting weapons. For two handed weapons you cannot wear a shield
while wielding one, unless it is a bucker. Unfortunately since they are
such small shields, they offer a smaller PB bonus then other shields.

Bucklers would be worn while wielding a two handed sword, heavy
warhammer, two handed axe, quarterstaff, bastard sword, halberd, etc...

- Classes: 2 handed smiting warriors, DPS warriors, and rarely some
  combos

<!-- -->

- Examples: Small wooden target shield, Small metal target shield, Metal
  buckler

## **Light Shields**

All shields are heavy, but these are less heavy. They can offer some
decent protection, but are a little bit less parry then heavier shields.
Better for characters with lower Str and Con scores.

- Classes: favored by scouts, thieves, archers, defense warriors, and
  some casters

<!-- -->

- Examples: Reinforced oaken shield, Shield of Arthedain, Shield of
  Cardolan, Gilded round shield

## **Heavy Shields**

These shields are very heavy, and usually used by characters with higher
Str and Con. They do provide good PB bonuses, if you can carry them
around.

- Classes: tank warriors, defense warriors, battle clerics, some combos

<!-- -->

- Examples: Large metal full shield, Large wooden wall shield, Metal
  wall, Large metal wall

# **Cloaks and Furs**

These items you wear on your back. They can provide many different
benefits, such as some protection or help you to hit a target. This will
describe the different general types. If a cloak or fur is in very bad
shape, it might not offer it's full DB or OB bonus, be sure to mend it
to help.

## **Dodge Cloaks**

Many cloaks in the game provide bonus to DB. Even a plain cloak is +3%
DB. So if you are looking for some protection, wear a cloak. Several
cloaks also offer a movement regen bonus as well. Some more rare cloaks
might also come with some spell defense, to help resist spells, or other
benefits. Cloaks are fairly light weight and are often worn by any
characters of any classes.

Some dodge cloaks that new players should strive for are:

- a plain cloak -\> worn traveller's cloak -\> forest green cloak

## **Offensive Furs**

Some warriors and warrior type combos might instead choose to wear fur
gear on their back. These tend to be heavier and increase OB. Some of
these furs are so heavy, it could become an issue for lower Str or Con
characters.

- Examples: fine lion pelt, cave-bear fur, black warg fur, fur-cloak

# **Combating Armour**

Fighting targets wearing armour can be tricky. If the target is wearing
cloth or soft leather don't worry about it. Those armours do not provide
very much protection. If the target is wearing rigid leathers, they
might be absorbing a small amount of damage. Still not a big deal.

Targets wearing chain mail or scale mail will be absorbing a noticeable
amount of damage, but you can over come it. Just the fight might last a
bit longer. If they have metal armour on, you will very much noticed
that your attacks are not doing as much damage as they should be. A good
example of this is using a piercing weapon vs a target in metal
armour... you will just be doing a few damage every hit... the fight can
seem to last a very long time.

Some mobs in the game also have 'natural armour' which offers them some
protection. So it will seem like they are wearing some armour when you
fight them... even if they are naked. Bear mobs, giants, trolls,
statues, trees, hobbit feet, and others will seem like they have this
natural armour.

There are a few ways or strategies to try and over come this protection:

- backstab - can do so much damage, that a few points of it being
  absorbed doesn't really matter
- poisons - can still effect you, even if you are wearing armour
- damage spells - ignore worn armour and do their full damage
- missile weapons - simply do so much damage, it helps some with it
  being absorbed
- smiting weapons - simply do so much damage, it helps some with it
  being absorbed
- concussion weapons - 1 or 2 handed, most of them are effective vs
  metal targets, doing bonus damage

Don't forget these tricks will also work against you if you are wearing
armour!

# **Spells of Protection**

There are several defensive spells in the game that will also help to
protect your character. This is a quick summary of how these spells can
protect you.

### **Bless**

This spell gives you +3% OB and +2% PB if you are on wimpy. So a little
help with parrying.

### **Strength**

This spell makes it easier to carry around heavy shield or armour. It
could help help you to raise your DB some, if they armour or shield is
to heavy. Or use up moves more efficiently.

### **Armour**

This spell works somewhat like worn armour. It has a % chance to absorb
some damage, and a max amount of damage it can absorb. It will show up
on your stat command by improving your % absorb. It also has a set
amount of hit points it has (that you cannot see) and once it has
absorbed that amount of hit points, the spell drops. Once nice thing
about this spell is it absorbs the same amount over all body hit
locations.

### **Protection from Evil**

This spell gives a small 'delay' or 'lag' of evil mobs trying to attack
you. It gives you another second or two to move along before they try to
attack you.

### **Sense Life**

This spell slightly increases the chance you might see someone sneaking
or hiding. It could maybe help you to prevent a sneak attack or
backstab. Do not rely on this spell, it is not very good protection.

### **Shroud**

This spell grants +10% DB, but it drops almost instantly when you are in
combat. So it only helps to protect on the first swing or 2 of combat.
Many lower level mobs cannot even see you to attack.

### **Shield**

This spell increases your DB, making you more likely to not be hit in
combat. Pretty needed by all casters and some combos in the game.

### **Sanctuary**

This higher level spell gives you a damage cap. So for example, if you
are hit with a fireball for 100 damage, but have a 20 hit point cap
Sanctuary spell up... you only take 20 damage, and the remaining 80
damage is ignored.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")

[Category:Guides](Category:Guides "wikilink") [Category:Newbie
Help](Category:Newbie_Help "wikilink")