---
title: Newbie Guide Travel Points
---

**Newbie Guide Travel Points**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

“It's a dangerous business, Frodo, going out your door. You step onto
the road, and if you don't keep your feet, there's no knowing where you
might be swept off to.”

Gandalf, JRRT, The Fellowship of the Ring

This guide is about travel points and hints and suggestions of how to
get them.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**travel points**.

**Travel points** are required for gaining levels, and is MUME's way of
encouraging you to explore the world and the map. Travel points are
often abbreviated as **tps**.

## **Information about your Travel Points**

### Level:

This command shows you what you need for XP and TPs for the next 5
levels. Every time you **level** up, it updates your list with the next
**level** you need.

<nowiki>gLevel 1 1 exp, 0 tp Level 2 1,000 exp, 100 tp Level 3 3,000
exp, 300 tp Level 4 7,000 exp, 600 tp Level 5 14,500 exp, 1,000 tp
...But the list does not end there...

</pre>

===<Info:===> On one line, this command shows you how many XP and TPs
you've gained.

<nowiki>gYou have scored 21,552,689 experience points and you have
144,252 travel points.

</pre>

### Prompt:

You can also choose to turn on the tps needed in your prompt. Check out
help prompt

type change prompt tp

### Achievement

You can also get a hint about areas you have or have not explored well
from your list of achievements. It is usually towards the top of your
achievement list. The game keeps track of where you have visited.

### Map Travelled:

This command shows zones near you and how much you have visited them. It
is a bit more specific then the Achievement information.

Here is an example. <nowiki>g

` Map of your travels on Nearby Zones`
`     -----------------------------`
`    |              -              |`
`    |              -              |`
`    |              -              |`
`    | ??          ?-?            ?|`
`    |=??       .. .-===         ??|`
`    |+??     =====-X=======-------|`
`    | =++=====.--=.+              |`
`    |              +              |`
`    |             ==              |`
`    |             =              ?|`
`    |             =              ?|`
`    |             =              ?|`
`    |             --             ?|`
`    |              ---          ??|`
`    |                -----    ??? |`
`     -----------------------------`

</pre>

You can also look at map global travel to see the entire game map for
this information.

## **Explaining TPs**

Travel Points are a 'reward' for exploring, travelling, and moving
around the rooms and map.

They are also required for leveling up, much like experience points. You
can always gain more travel points then what you need to level up. So it
is totally fine to have enough travel points to be, say, 3 levels ahead.

The lowest amount of travel points a room in the game can have is 0.

The highest amount of travel points a room can have is 100.

Gaining 200 tps really isn't that difficult... but trying to gain 3000
tps can take a while.

Rooms that are frequently visited by many players, tend to have low
travel points. For example the Old East Road between Bree and Shire.
Very often travelled by many players, almost never a travel point is
there.

To gain more travel points, you want to try and visit rooms and areas of
the game that are not visited very often.

Rooms that are very rarely visited tend to store up travel points over
time, until someone visits that room. Say a player visits a room, and
gains 50 travel points from it, then a few minutes later you enter the
same room, you'll get zero travel points. That other player got them all
and the room has not had time to accumulate more of them yet.

This may or may NOT be how it works, but you can use this as a guide to
understanding travel points. Lets say a room has 100 travel points in
it, and someone enters that room. Those travel points are then
redistributed around the rest of the rooms in the game. If a room hits
100 travel points, it stops accumulating any new travel points, and they
instead go to other rooms that have not been visited very much or very
recently.

## **TPs and Grouping**

If you are in a group, you share the travel points in a room, but it's
not evenly shared. The leader of the group, entering the room first,
gains a small bonus, while the rest of the members of the group gain
about 20% less travel points from that room.

So over all getting TPs while solo OR while leading a group is the
fastest way to gain them. If you are constantly following someone, you
may notice you struggle to stay ahead on TPs.

## **How to Gain TPs**

There are several different ways to gain travel points in MUME. If you
are mixing all styles together, you should stay current on your amount
of tps needed.

### Quests

Quests do not just reward you with coins, gear, or xp. A few quests in
the game grant TPs as a reward, the first time you do the quest.

### Discovering Secret Doors

Every time you discover a secret door, you gain 9 TPs. There are
different ways to discover them. If someone else has left the door open,
and you walk into the room and see it, that counts as a discovery. If
you attempt to open the door, but you cannot because it is locked, does
damage, or is too heavy, that also counts as a discovery.

To see how many secret exits you have discovered, type achieve exit.

### Travelling

The first time you visit a zone, you get some bonus TPs during your
first visit. If you visit the zone again, you do not gain this first
visit bonus of TPs. So simply travelling around to new zones you have
not been to is one way to gain some TPs.

Check out the map travelled command to see where you have and have not
been.

Some skills, such as **Ride**, **Wilderness**, **Endurance**, and
**Breath of Briskness** can help with travelling.

### Exploring

Walking around a zone room by room can also gain you some TPs. Try
visiting places that players do not go to very often. Sometimes palces
behind locked doors, rooms you need to swim too, or even more dangerous
swim underwater too, places that you need to climb too, and other hard
to reach spots often will have some more TPs then other places.

One popular way of doing this is to get a boat, and travel the rivers
and lakes of the game. Over all, they tend to have more TPs then other
areas.

Some skills, such as **Wilderness**, **Endurance**, **Breath of
Briskness**, **Climb**, **Search**, **Sneak**, **Pick**, and **Swim**
can help with exploring.

## **Areas that tend to be good for TPs**

Some areas are simply visited less often, due to the terrain is
difficult there. They can often accumulate more travel points:

Dense forests, mountains, swamps, areas with alot of random rooms, doors
that are too heavy to open, areas with lots of climbing, areas with alot
of rooms that are no-ride... etc...

Lakes, rivers, oceans, underwater rooms, basically anywhere that
requires alot of swimming.

Legend homes can be a places where you can gain some TPs now and again.
Most of them are locked or behind a secret exit.

Just think of it this way, if it's a challenge or a pain to get some
where, then players visit it less and travel points visit it more!

## **Gear that is Good for TPing**

Light sources, lantern and oil, or better yet a red ruby. Good for
exploring caves, tunnels, mines, dungeons, and really dark forests.

Mounts, a saddle, and a ranks in the ride skill. If you are riding alot
or long distances, you should have ride over 75%. Many players have it
over 90%.

The mounts that are good for this are mountain mules or dales ponies for
shorter races. Trained horses, war horses, Rohirrim horses for taller
races.

Players of the Rohirrim subrace gain a bonus to riding and dealing with
mounts.

A light pair of boots, that helps out movement. Examples are:

black padded boots (the lightest), smooth black boots (also a sheath),
and fine soft leather boots

If you are exploring in areas with alot of snow, snowshoes might be a
good idea. Like in parts of the Misty Mountains.

Rope can be handy exploring in a group, fine elven rope from a quest in
Lorien is the best. This can help players with less climb skill still
get around.

Canoes, rafts, boats, can all help you explore surface water rooms. A
few rooms in the game have rapids, and boats can't go down them. Also
boats are CRAZY HEAVY and can run you out of moves pretty quickly.

Several items you can wear on your back help with movement regen:

Woollen traveller's cloak helps with move regen a little bit

Forest green cloak, russet cloak, or ragged blackened cloak, all help
regen moves.

Some warrior types prefer a imposing, golden mantle, helps movement
regen.

## **Races and TPs**

All troll characters require much less tps to level up then any other
races in the game.

Fallohide hobbits gain travel points more efficiently then other races,
and help can help others in their groups gain travel points as well.
They ignore the small penalty to TPs being shared in a group.

## **Storyteller and TPs**

If you gain ALOT of travel points, you might end up on the traveller's
list. Just visit the storyteller in Bree and 'ask storyteller travel'

It's similiar to the war lord list, but for players that have traveled
alot of the map, and while doing so, gained alot of travel points.