---
title: Newbie Guide Campfires
---

**Guide Camping and Campfires in MUME**

Campfires are a very valuable asset to playing MUME. Especially for new
players.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at:

[Media:<https://mume.org/help/help_index>](Media:https:/mume.org/help/help_index "wikilink")

To make a campfire, use the command **camp**. It has a delay and will
take a few seconds to build your campfire. Any character can do it, even
if you are naked. Campfires are built faster or with a shorter delay if
you have Wilderness skill. Campfires eventually burn out, but if you
type camp again, you can refresh it with new wood. You cannot camp in
cities, buildings, or in caves. But otherwise you can camp in almost any
room outside in the game, even in swamps and marshes. But not on open
water!

Some areas of the game dislike campfires being built there. Beware in
the Forest of Fangorn. The Ents and Huorns there do not like fires being
set in their woods.

Once a campfire is made it has the following benefits. It lights up the
room and acts as a light source. You can even build a campfire in the
dark. It also warms the room up some, raising the temperature. But not
enough to melt ice. If it is cold or chilly in a room, lighting a
campfire might raise the temperature up to mild or warm, which means it
is safe to sleep there without catching the flu. If the room is too
cold, you have a chance of catching the disease flu while sleeping.

Some mobs are scared of fire and will flee at the sight one, instead of
attacking you. So it can be a type of defense if you need to rest
outside. It will not stop all mobs from attacking you, but many normal
forest animals don't like open fire.

You can also get crude torches from a campfire. Use the command **get
torch fire**. They are not very good light sources and do not last very
long, but they are free to make.

One major benefit of campfires is being able to **cook** at one. You
need a pan to cook. You can hold the pan or wear it on your belt, but
they can also cook just from being in your inventory. You can cook raw
meat, which makes it smoked meat. Smoked meat lasts longer before it
decays and weights a little bit less. If you have salt in your
inventory, you can cook smoked and cured meat. It lasts even longer
before it decays and weighs a little bit less. Cooked meats can also be
sold at some grocer shops for small amounts of coins. It's a slow way to
make money, but works. If you have a casserole you can also use the
**boil** command to make other dishes, stews, and soups. You need to add
water or another liquid to the casserole first. Look at help boil
command for more information. There are even some herblores that need to
be cooked once they are made as well.

Campfires can even be used to mend some gear in the game. If you have a
cross pien hammer, you can mend some metal items at a campfire with
varying degrees of success. Some Sinda elves are particularly good at
this.

If you are playing as a Black Númenórean campfires can be used like an
inn in towns. You can use the command **camp rent** to log out in many
areas of the map. They even work for retiring a Black Numenorean
character.

Some drawbacks of camping. There are a few drawbacks of camping, but
forest fires is not one of them. You won't burn down any areas of the
game with a campfire. You can use the torches taken from a campfire to
**burn** some webs in the game, however. If some player runs across a
campfire and sees it burning they can look for tracks there, and
possibly find you if you've walked away from the campfire. The campfire
is a sign that some was was recently in that room.

There is also a command called "**look around**" that allows any player
to scan the zone around them and look for signs of smoke rising up from
campfires. It's not very direct, but can help you find your way back in
the general direction of a campfire.

You can use the **'cover campfire**' command to help reduce the light it
provides.