---
title: Newbie Guide Aging and Death
permalink: /Newbie_Guide_Aging_and_Death/
---

**Newbie Guide Aging and Death**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

“Death is just another path, one that we all must take. The grey
rain-curtain of this world rolls back, and all turns to silver glass,
and then you see it.”

Gandalf, JRRT, Return of the King

This guide is all about aging in MUME and different types of death.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like **help
age**.

# **Aging**

I strongly suggest you read the help file about how age affects your
character: help age

All characters get older in MUME, it has several game effects, and might
make your character more difficult to play at some point. There are also
ways to reset your age. This guide will be going over age effects ways
to deal with it.

All classes are playable at any age, but you may notice some classes
have small advantages at some age ranges over others.

Some age ranges are better for some classes, like warriors and thiefs
tend to favor young to middle ages. You tend to have better physical
stats (Str, Dex, Con) at those ages.

But casters, like mages and clerics, do well middle age, and a little
older. You tend to have better mental stats (Int, Wis) at those ages.
And your mana and mana regen are a little bit better.

## **Age Reset**

There are a few different ways to reset your age in the game.

### Mob Death

The easiest method is to mob die. Have a mob kill you, and it resets
your character back to newbie/starting age.

### Retirement

Next is a age reset from retirement. You must retire your character. If
you are level 25 and below, you can get an agereset in 1 real life
month. If you are level 26 or above, you can get an agereset in 6 RL
months. Check your information in your account menu to see if you are
ready for an age reset yet.

### Fountain of Youth

Last is the Fountain of Youth or FoY. This is somewhat like a quest, but
it is not a quest. This is a magical fountain that is near the Dark
Tower, or about half way between Rivendell and the Orc Caves, north of
the mountain trail. It is guarded by some difficult giants. And it is a
somewhat active PK or PvP area, so much caution is needed. Mostly you
need a group there to help you.

When you drink from the Fountain of Youth, you enter a "delay and/or
stun" where you get a description of the powerful magics that are
resetting your age. This is not the same as a mobdeath, or a retirement
agereset. It might NOT reset you entirely back to newbie/starting age,
but it will be close. One side effect of drinking from the FoY or
Fountain of Youth is that you end up at 1 hit point, 1 mana point, and 1
move point. This leaves you very vulnerable to anyone that might be
PKing in the area.

## **Ancient**

There is a special age category called **Ancient**. That means you are
really, really, really old for your race. You can achieve this special
age just by... well... waiting a long time and getting really old.

There is a magical, faster way to become ancient. It is from the hidden
Alchemist in **Fornost**. He can assist you with a magical aging potion.
Making you ancient very quickly. This is powerful magic and difficult to
undo.

Being **ancient** does have the benefit of reduced **rent** costs, but
otherwise is difficult to play since your stats and regens will be
lowered with this extreme old **age**. Most ancient characters never
leave a city.

# **Dying in MUME**

There are several different types of **death** that can happen to your
character in MUME. Here is a list of the types, and the consequences of
what happens if you do die that way.

The **history** command keeps track of what levels you've died at, if
you went down levels, and often keeps track of what killed you. Type
**history** to find out more.

Anytime you die in MUME the following happens:

- you show up in Mandos naked
- all affects on you disappear, like potions, spells, poisons, wounds,
  diseases, etc...

## **Everyone is Immortal... Kind Of**

There are also some things that will not kill your character in MUME.
You cannot die from any of the following conditions, but they will make
you much weaker and more challenging to play:

starvation - regens go down, takes much longer to recover dehydration -
regens go down, takes much longer to recover old age - regens and some
stats go down, but won't kill you, just weakens you diseases - can
reduce your regens and stats, but won't kill you, just weakens you

### Mob Death

If you die to a mob, that is a mob death. Like dying to a cavebear, some
roots, or being backstabed by an assassin. You get have the following
penalties from dying that way.

- lose xp, usually enough to drop you one level, the amount can vary
  from the level of mob that killed you
- your age is reset back to newbie/starting age

### PK or PvP Death

- lose xp, but often much less then a mob death, sometimes will not drop
  you a level
- lose war points if you had any, and possibly grant war points to your
  opponent(s)
- does not reset age to newbie/starting age
- leaves your corpse more at risk of being looted by other players

### Deathtrap

These are traps or rooms that are designed to kill you off.

- you lose tps if dying in a deathtrap
- does not reset age to newbie/starting age
- your corpse and gear is very likely gone forever, only a few
  deathtraps have a place to recover the body

### Exploring Death

These deaths can happen from several following exampls:

- falling down a cliff or a bad climb and taking too much damage
- drowning in water or underwater
- dying to some damage traps, like a wall collasping or cave in that
  falls and crushes you
- does not reset age to newbie/starting age

Some ways to avoid these exploration deaths are to practice Climb and
Swim. 50% Climb and Swim are not bad for 'general exploring.' But if you
want to try some more challenging areas, you may want over 80% Swim and
Climb or higher.

### Dying from Affected By

This type of death can happen if you get a very life threatening wound
or exposed to some very powerful poisons (such as a rattlesnake). You
might make it back to town.. or the main road... but still end up
bleeding out or subcumming to the poison.

- does not reset age to newbie/starting age
- one of the least risky ways to die

## **Level Loss**

If you lose enough experience to lose a level, you might notice a few
changes from the level loss:

- your hit points will go down slightly
- your spells may have a little higher mana cost
- you might backfire some spells a little more often
- you have negative practicies total (this will correct if you re-level)
- your OB may go down slightly

As long as you go out and earn more XP, from defeating mobs or finishing
quests, you will re-level in time.

## **Mandos**

The Halls of **Mandos** is where you end up when you die. There is a
sign there with some helpful information it for new players. If it is
your first, second, or third time to Mandos, it might be worth reading.

Mandos also loads some very basic gear in it, maybe a knife or a loaf of
bread.

Also the Halls of Mandos will magically feed you. Just type eat or drink
in Mandos and you will be full.

One annoying feature of being in Mandos is you cannot instantly return
back to the world of Arda. When you show up in Mandos, you are at 1 hit,
and need to **regen** your **hit points** back up to Bad. The Halls of
Mandos do not allow you to leave at Awful hits.

You can also end up in Mandos from certain types of game reboots or game
crashes.

## **Praying**

One function of the **pray** command is to be magically teleported from
the Halls of Mandos to a town or city. It is a one way trip from Mandos
to which ever city you are praying too. You will magically appear at a
city fountain or a town square.

In several major towns, there will be a named mob there that is a city
guide at the town square. They might ask to show you around the city,
and give you a tour of what services are available. You will need to
follow them for an informative tour.

### New Players

New players should probably pray to the Tower Hills. That area is
designed to be somewhat safe and very informative and helpful for you to
learn the game. It also is the most quests in one small area in the
entire game.

The Introduction Gandalf quest will gain you access to Tower Hills.

### Races and Praying

Different cities and towns may be more welcoming to some races then
others. Over all these are the best places for newer players to rent for
each **race**.

Dwarves: Blue Mountains Elves: Grey Havens Half-elves: Grey Havens
Hobbits: Shire Men: Bree or Fornost Beornings: Anduin Vale (the town is
called Ingrove)

There are possibly more places you can pray too, but as a new player
they might not be the best spot to start in.

If you are in Mandos, you can just type pray to get a list of anywhere
you can currently pray too.

To gain more access to different towns to pray to, you will need to get
a citizenship there.

## **Shadowing**

Sometimes when you die, other players die, or certain mobs die, you
might see a shadow magically arise above their corpse to protect it.

Shadows can start appearing over players corpses somewhere after level
13-14. There is a RANDOM chance that you get a shadow after you die.
This random chance to leave a shadow slightly goes up a little as you
level higher.

Mobs that are humanoids can also randomly leave shadows, but the chance
is very very if the mob is lower level, and it slightly increases as the
mobs are higher level. Examples of humanoid mobs that can leave a shadow
would be dwarves, elves, men, hobbits, orcs, trolls.

Shadows protect the corpse and all of the gear on it. You cannot loot a
corpse if a shadow is guarding it, UNLESS it is your YOUR corpse. You
can always loot your own corpse. But if you do loot it, the shadow will
fade away and disappear.

Shadows have very high defenses, especially extremely high dodge, making
them difficult to hit. For a solo player, they can be very difficult to
kill. The higher level the mob or player was that died making the
shadow, the more hit points they will have. One nice thing is that
shadows are non-aggressive and will not attack you, even if you try to
loot the corpse they are guarding. But if you attack a shadow, they may
remember you and then become aggressive to you.

## **Tips to Avoid Some Deaths**

Do not carry too much weight, making it harder to **flee**, **dodge**,
or move away from threats.

Avoid being hungry or thirsty, helps keep your regen rate up.

Practice **Bandage** skill to 50%. This can keep you from bleeding from
a **wound**. Bandage skill can even bring someone back from dying! To
like 1 hit point from -1 hit points.

If you notice your hit points dropping fast to Bad, you may want to flee
and not stay in that fight.

**Change mood wimpy** to increase your **parry**, you might last a few
swings longer.

**Change** your **wimpy** to help you automatically **flee** more often
from a fight.

Do NOT stand in a room with corpses of aggressive mobs you just killed,
and then cure light, bandage, or rest there... the zone can repop on
you, and BOOM! the room is full of aggressive mobs again. Walk a couple
of rooms away THEN cure light, bandage, make a **campfire**, etc...

## **Checking Your Corpse**

When you die, there are actually now 2 copies of you. One alive (and
naked) in Mandos, and another copy that is laying around somewhere with
your gear on it (if you are lucky) as a corpse.

If you are using Mmapper, you will see a red arrow appear on the map
after you die, trying to help direct you back to your corpse. The room
you died it should also be highlighted red.

You can revisit your corpse, and get any remaining items left on it. You
have 1 hour or 60 minutes until your corpse will decay and rot away to
nothing. If any of your gear is left on that corpse when it decays, it
is gone as well. Best to hurry and try to get your stuff back.

Warning: by the time you make it back the area with your corpse, the
zone could have repoped. That means any mobs that were dead, or doors
that were open and unlocked, could now be back alive and shut and locked
up tight. It could be more challenging to get your corpse or gear back.

Please beware about checking your corpse in an active PK or PvP area.
There is a chance you could die again, and even faster since you'll
likely be naked.

If you died while **drowning** or other environmental effect, your body
should still be there. But if it was deep water, it very likely sunk
down in the water. Making it a bit harder to retrieve gear and items.

If you died in a **deathtrap**, you are very likely out of luck. Many
deathtraps mean your corpse is GONE, and you'll never get the items
back. SOME deathtraps are nice, and have a recoverable area for you to
get your gear... like at the bottom of a cliff or canyon. Or washed down
stream from some water trap. But most deathtraps means you can't get
your gear or corpse back.

## **Sauron's Minions and Death**

As a player of a Minion of Sauron you will have much more limited
options of where to pray too.

Trolls can only pray to one area in the game, the Troll Warrens.

Zaugurz orcs can only pray to the Zaugurz orc caves.

The Tarkhnarb and Morruhk Orcs can only pray to the Goblin Caves. But
Morruhk orcs have their own very difficult starting cave area at first
level.

Black Númenóreans show up in a mysterious area that will pray you to a
random room on the map, possibly spread out over a dozen different
zones. You will always be surprised praying as a BN, and might show up
next to a pack of hungry wolves.

## **Sundeath (Trolls only)**

This is a very special type of death that is for the troll races ONLY.
No other races in the game are effected by this special death.

Trolls can Sundie if they are ever exposed to the sun. The sun magically
turns you into a statue of stone. This type of death resets your
character back to newbie/starting age and back to LEVEL ONE. No matter
what level you were before the sundeath. You do gain an achievement of
sundeath, and it keeps track of how many times you sundied.

You also have the option as a troll to reset your trophy and xp after
you sundie. At level 7 or 8, sundeath isn't really a big deal... After
level 26, it can be very frustrating. Trolls gain many other benefits
due to this very scary type of death in the game.