---
title: Newbie Guide Doors, Exits, and Exploring
---

Newbie Guide Doors, Exits, and Exploring

The goal of this gude is to help newer players find doors, open doors,
move, and explore.

And maybe die less while doing it!

'link for help files'

Copy stuff from old guides.

Basic Exit Information

First command to learn is the exit command and change autoexits.

The exit command shows you the way out from the room you are currently
standing in. It might be north, south, east, west, up, or down. It
should also show you any visible open or closed exits you can see. In
town, a building, or a farm, this might be a type of door. If you are in
a cave or out in the wilds, this might be a plant or rock covering up an
exit.

The change autoexits command brings up the available visible exits
whenever you enter a new room. So autoexit can save some time and give
you more information about where you can go. Also autoexit helps with
the mmapper interface for knowing where you are in the game.

Options with Exits

You can move in any direction for any exit you can see. Try typing n, e,
s, w, u, or d.

You can look in any direction for more information: look n, look d, look
e

Look direction "Nothing special there..." means it's some type of wall
or the side of a cave or mountain. It means you can't go that way.

You can search in a direction to maybe find out more information about
the room or maybe a secret or hidden door.

You can scout in any direction you can move. Try typing scout w, or
scout n.

If there is a mob in the direction you are scouting, you will be able to
see it. You can also see the next rooms name, and the exits from that
room. Some more dangerous areas of the game do not allow scouting. And a
few rare exits are 'no-scout', just means the command won't give you any
good information.

Types of Exits

You might run across exits that don't allow you to move that direction.
Or require some more effort then just typing, n, e, s, w, u, or d.

Exits:

normal - just type a direction and move that way and back if you want

swim - some exits require you to have swim turned on to go that
direction

climb - some exits require you to have climb turned on to go that
direction

no-ride - some exits you can pass through only if you are walking or
leading a mount. You cannot enter them if you are riding. So just lead a
mount to get through.

oneway- some exits only allow you to move in one direction through them.
Warning if you scout these exits, you are automatically pulled through!!
It is possible something dangerous could be on the other side.

drain moves - a few exits in the game take a few more movement points to
pass through. This could be just some mud (takes 2-3 extra moves) to
extremely deep snow (can take 20-25+ moves).

random - this can be very frustrating! There are different types of
random exits. Some just give you a percent chance to go a different
direction then what you typed. North turns out to send you east, west
can send you north, etc. Makes it MUCH easier to get lost. Also some
random exits force anything following you to unfollow you. So you can
lose your group or your mount with you. If you are skilled in the Track
skill from the Ranger guild, you might get randomed by an exit less
often. Also if the sun is up you might get randomed less often.

shutting - few exits in the game shut a door behind you after you pass
through them

warning - possible death trap or damage exit, few exits in the game you
might take damage passing them from falling rocks or sharp thorns. Some
will instantly kill you or possibly kill you with a short time delay.
Almost all of them will give you some sort of warning if you look in
that direction to see if it is safe.

falling - there are differnt types of falling exits, but the general
idea is if you go that direction, you can fall and take damage. The
damage might be low (10-20 hits) or can be very high (100 hits). Some
falls force you to sit down or

`even leave you dropped in a river, and needbto swim!  `

Some fall exits can be avoided by not riding, going 1 at a time to keep
your groups weight down to avoid breaking a weak bridge or branch.

size or height - very few exits in the game restrict how big of a
character can walk through them. Pretty much these exits are hobbit
only. If you are too big, you might hit your head for some light damage
(1-4 hits), and not be able to pass that direction.

mob stopping - there are some exits in the game where a mob will stop
you from passing through an exit. Some of these mobs you can pass after
you pay them. Others you have to kill or sleep them to get past.

webbed - It's even more Tolkien with spiders! Some exits are webbed. If
you try and move through a webbed exit, you can get stuck. Sometimes you
can break free from the webs after spamming directions or fleeing.
Others you need to burn the webs first. You can use fire spells, lit
torches and lanterns to burn some webs. Some webs are slightly fire
resistant, and you need to pour oil or alcohol on them first.

Swim and Climb Exits

Some exits that require swim and climb you can do by just turning on the
swim and climb options in the game.

Some exits are cliffs, mountains, valleys, wells, tall walls, trees, or
other difficult terrain to move through. You'll need to use climb.

climb safe will let you climb any exit that won't hurt you by falling
down.

climb aways will let you climb any exit that might hurt you by falling
down. The damage can be small (4-5 hits) to large (12-15 hits), so
caution doing alot of this at lower levels.

Climb exits work by percentage. If the climb exit is a 25%, if you have
28% climb, you'll pass by it easily, but if you only have 0 or 12%
climb, you'll have issues and can often fall down by trying it. Some
characters with a higher Dexterity or Strength a slight advantage with
this.

If you are following someone with a rope, they can use it to help you
avoid damage and climb more successfully. Also a player with high climb
skill can climb up and tie a rope down an exit, to greatly boost your
chances to climb an exit.

You can practice the climb skill at Ranger guilds. Having a good
Dexterity score will help you get a high % with your practice, Willpower
and Strength help some too.

If you are a low level just learning to explore, 30% climb is good
enough to get started.

If you make it to higher levels and go to more dangerous areas 60%+
climb might be needed.

If the exit was a lake, river, ocean, pond, or other source of water,
you'll need some swim instead.

If you are using a boat, you can avoid needing to swim. Basically a boat
is equal to 100% in the Swim skill. All you need to do is hold the boat
in your inventory. Boats load in several areas of the game, and reappear
every repop. Boats do have one major drawback, they are very HEAVY!!! Do
not just carry one around, they are too heavy to do that. Just use them
for your water trips as needed.

If you can't find a boat you can buy them fairly cheap from Captain
shops, they sell and buy boats. You can find a Captain shop in GH
Forlond, by Brandywine Bridge, Rushey, and Hobbiton in Shire, Tharbad,
and Rivendell.

Also, there are a few rooms on rivers that have rapids, and boats either
can't cross them, or maybe will break on the rocks.

During the winter and in some colder areas of the game, rivers and lakes
will become frozen. You can walk across frozen water and lead a horse
across. No swimming or boating is needed.

If you don't have a boat, you will be swimming. The more Swim skill you
have from the Ranger guild, the less moves it will use, and the less you
might swallow water, choke, and lose some hits. If you run out of moves
you will drown, which is a death where you lose some travel points. If
all you do is some rare surface swimming, you can probably get by with
30% swim skill or so, and maybe use a boat as needed.

Some rivers flow very fast, and will push you down stream, even if you
do not want to go that direction. Beware of fast running water, as you
may end up somewhere you did not intend on going. Also some running
water is so fast, it is hard to swim back out of it. It has a delay and
takes many moves and rooms to get out.

Swimming underwater is very different. You use up moves very VERY fast!
And your chances of drowning underwater is MUCH higher then on the
surface. Mostly you want to move under water as fast as you can type, so
you can reach air again. One item helps very slightly with underwater
swimming: a long hollow stem. It gives you a very small assistance with
the first underwater room. You can pick them from reeds around several
different water sources in the game. For swimming underwater alot,
you'll want a swim skill of over 90%.

Types of Doors (and other Exits)

You might see a door if you look in a direction, like look north, look
east, or have autoexits on. You can open and close any door you can see.

open oakdoor, open branch, open treestump, close hatch, close greenbush,
close barndoor

If you want to save some time and typing, you can use 'exit' in place of
visible door names. This will open and close any exits you can see,
without having to type out the entire door or exit name.

open exit or close exit

You might run across some issues when exploring and opening. Some doors
or exits might be locked, stuck, magically sealded, require keys, or
worse, hurt you or trigger some type of trap! Here is a quick run down
of types of exits and then you'll get more details on them as you
contine this guide:

Doors:

call - many city gates can be opened from the outside if you call at
them. The gate guards will hear you on the inside, and if you are a
citizen, open up to let you in. To get back out you just need to 'say
open'.

locked - you need to pick or bash the door open, some locked doors in
the game require a specific key that might load near by on a mob or in a
chest

latched - much easier to open then a locked door, you can simply turn
the latch and unlock them. Just type unlock exit. It's really just a
door with an extra step, if you are on the side with the latch.

delayed - the exit simply takes some time to open, you can't do it
instantly

heavy - these doors require a certain amount of Strength to open them.
You can even try to open them with help, like having 3 players all open
at the same time and add your Strength up. Some doors take 18 Strenght
to over 40 Strength to open!

damage - these exits will hurt you while opening them, like damage from
thorns, sharp and jagged metal, rocks falling, etc... sometimes wearing
armour or having the armour spell up can help reduce the damage.

hidden or secret - this is a door you cannot see and does not show up on
autoexit. It can take some effort to find them.

lever or chain - some doors you cannot open without pulling a specific
lever or chain to trigger them to open for you. Some of these doors open
with a small delay.

knock - some doors or gates will open with the knock command. Just knock
gate and they will magically open.

special - some door require very specialized means of opening. It could
be a spell, a quest, timed by seasons or even moon light. They can take
some research learning how to open them.

no-pick - the door cannot be opened with picking

no-bash - the door is unbashable

no-break - the door cannot be opened with the break door spell

Types of Keys

Keys for locked doors and chests are commonly found in the possesion of
mobs. Most keys are pretty simple, find them, and you can unlock the
door they are made for. But some keys are a bit more complex:

normal - the key is pretty normal, and just opens one exit

no-rent - by default, most keys in the game are not rentable

rentable - a few keys in the game can be rented

decay - a few keys in the game decay in a certain amount of time, better
hurry to use them. It could be gone in 24 minutes or so.

one time use - one time use keys break when you use them, meaning you
can't use them more then once. Most keys you can use over and over.

There can even be other objects that act as a key. Several doors in the
game are opened by gems, some require special rods, a branch, a pry bar,
one even needs a pickaxe!

Secret and Hidden Doors

Many doors in the game are a hidden or secret door. They have some type
of keyword you need to type to open them. Using 'open exit' is not good
enough. Finding this key word can be tricky. Some times you need to
re-read the room description for a clue. Maybe you need to
<look direction> to see a clue that can help.

But the most reliable way is to use the Search skill, from the Thief
guild. If you search in a direction, you have a chance to find they exit
name. You do not really need a high search, as if you fail, you can
simply search over and over a gain, it just takes a little bit of time.
If you fail the search check you'll get this message "You don't see
anything special there..." That does not mean there is no secret door
there, just you failed to find it looking that time.

1-2 pracs in search is often plenty, unless you are doing some hardcore
exploring of new areas. A few rare doors randomly switch and change
their keywords over time, and you need to rediscover them every time.

search east, search down, search north

Locked Doors and Opening Them

If a door does not have a key, or you do not have the key you'll need to
look for another way in. One option is to bash the door. Bashing doors
is based off of your Strength and your percent in the Bash skill from
the Warrior guild. A few races in the game get a bonus to bashing down
doors as well. Some doors are harder to bash down then others and some
you cannot bash at all. It takes a delay to bash a door and some
movement points. So becareful, if you fail a few bashes you can end up
low on moves pretty quickly. You'll want a pretty high percent in the
Bash skill to even attempt this, 75-100% for any real chance of success.

If you do not have the Bash skill, you might try the Pick skill instead
from the Thief guild. Doors that are locked have a percent of pick that
is needed to open them. If you don't have enough pick, it will tell you
you can't open the door. The message is 'you try to pick the lock, but
quickly give up.'

If you have enough percent in pick, you'll begin a delayed attempt to
unlock the door. If you have very high pick this might go quickly. If
your pick is barely enough it can take a long time to open it.

Let's say a door requires 50% pick to open and you only have 45% pick
practiced. You'll never pick the door open. But if you have 48% pick
practiced, you'll open it VERY slowly. If you have 70% pick, you'll open
it reasonably fast.

One item you can get in the game to help is lockpicks. Lockpicks add a
base +25% pick to whatever you have practiced in pick, even if it is 0%.
So just having a set of lockpicks can open up really easy to pick doors
in the game. Then if you can find any lockpick upgrades, it adds +3% to
your picks for each upgrade. Some upgrades you do a quest for, some you
pay for, others you even have to kill for.

So here is an example, a character has 35% pick practiced from the Thief
guild. Then they get a set of lockpicks. Later they are lucky enough to
get 3 upgrades done to that set of picks. Now their pick total is
35+25+9 = 69% Many doors in the game can now be opened. Really hard
doors tend to be above 75% or more, but they are rare. Just getting
started, a pick of 30-40% will get you in alot of places, and that can
include the lockpick bonus. Alot of characters have 1-2 pracs in pick,
lockpicks, and maybe an upgrade or 2.

Chests and Sarcophagus

Most chests are pretty straight forward. You can just open them and
examine them to see what they have inside. But a few are locked. You can
pick the chests open, but some of them can only be opened with a key.
Very few might be opened with another tool.

Travel Points

If you follow some of the information in this guide, it will also help
you get travel points. You can often find some more travel points in
rooms of the game that are somewhat harder to get too. Behind difficult
doors or areas with lots of swimming and climbing can be more travel
points then other easier to visit areas.