---
title: Newbie Guide Herblores
---

**Newbie Guide Herblores**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

"Thereupon the herb-master entered. 'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil,
as the rustics name it,' he said; 'or athelas in the noble tongue, or to
those who know somewhat of the Valinorean...' 'I do so,' said Aragorn,
'and I care not whether you say now asÃ«a aranion or kingsfoil, so long
as you have some.'"

JRRT, The Return of the King

This guide is about using and making herblores in MUME. I will not be
going into very much on specific herblores, but more of the general idea
of how to make them.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**mix**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Herblores**

Cooking food or using a casserole is as close as MUME has to a crafting
system in game that is accessible to every player. But if you really
want to craft more in MUME, **herblores** are for you. They also act
somewhat as 'magical' potions, allowing those without spells to gain
temporary boons. Another nice benefit of **herblores** is you can
**mix** them and **give** it away to another character or group member.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Types of Herblores**

Herblores can be broken up in to a few categories in the game.

**Poisons**: These herblores make a vial of **poison** that you use
against either a mob or a player. Most poison herblores make a vial of
**poison**. Once the vial of poison is made, you need to use the
**envenom** skill to apply it to a weapon. Successfully hitting someone
with the weapon gives a chance of injecting your target with the
**poison**.

**Food**: A couple of herblores in the game are really more of a food
that might offer some sort of benefit. Some require a campfire or
fireplace to **cook** them. You can't really benefit from them if you
are already full.

**Potions**: Most of the herblores in the game make some type of a
'potion'. You **drink** it to gain the effects. Many herblores call
these **potions** something else like: a mug, a bowl, a draught, a
flask, a philter, etc...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Herblore Like "Loots" in Game (or one shot magical items)**

There are actually a very few **potions** that load in the game. Some of
these mimic an herblore. You can loot them, but some of them decay after
a duration of time. So best to **drink** them as soon as you need them.
You cannot save most of them for later. One thing all these items have
in common is they are either one shot use, or only usable a few times.

### **Alcohol!!**

Drinking in MUME will slur your speech, making you hard to under stand
by other players if you are drunk. The drunk effect will fade, so
eventually other players will be able to understand what you are saying.
Also, if you are full of water, you won't be able to drink very much
**alcohol**. Some drinks in the game get you drunk faster then others.
So beer will get you drunk, but not as fast as other, stronger drinks.
Some alcohol is lootable from mobs and chests, or you can **buy** it at
several bartenders in game. Alcohol does not decay, but carrying around
alot of it can get heavy.

One side effect of drinking **alcohol** in MUME is it will affect your
hits and mana. It lowers your total mana and slightly lowers your mana
regen. But while doing that, it raises your total hit points. So
drinking in MUME is oddly like a weak potion for warrior types. You will
sober up, and your bonus hit points will fade, along with the mana
penalty.

### Poison Vials:

Several mobs in the game load a vial of poison. You can loot the vial
and use it, just like a vial from an herblore. They will decay after
about playing the game for an hour. Without the **envenom** skill
however, mostly they are just sellable loot. There is a pawn shop in
Fornost that will buy them, and one shop in the very dangerous sewers
under Tharbad.

### Black Candle:

This odd item is not a potion, but does provide a spell effect you may
find useful. You must hold the candle then use it. It casts a ROOM WIDE
sleep spell effect. This spell will not affect you, but can affect all
other targets in the room. So yes, you can sleep your horse or other
group members. It's a weak sleep spell, so some mobs will save against
it and not fall asleep. Very useful against groups of lower level mobs.
They do not decay.

### Brown Bottle:

This loot mimics an antidote herblore. It's a potion that removes or
cures any poison you might have. It may also make you resistant to
poisons for a very short amount of time after drinking it. They load in
a few rare spots in the game. They will very likely decay after about
30-60 minutes. The tanner in Bree also hands one out for a quest.

### Green Bottle:

This odd potion can help you recover from several diseases such as flu,
plague, or amibia. It comes with a small penalty to **Willpower** and
mana, but that fades quickly. It has a small chance of loading in a few
rare rooms in the game.

### Infusion:

The most common "potion" in MUME. It loads in several areas near and in
the Shire. It will cure the flu if you drink it and also removes ALL
potion and herblore effects on you. So if you have an herblore up you
want to keep, do not drink this potion. It also provides a small and
short boost to **mana** and mana regen. It's nice for like one extra
**cure light** spell. The infusion will decay after like 24 minutes to
45 minutes or so.

### Pipeweed:

Pipeweed is not really a potion, but has a small benefit similar to one.
You need a pipe with some pipeweed in it. Hold the pipe in your hand,
REST, then **smoke** pipe. It can give you a boost to **mana** regen,
and has a random chance to grant you 0 to as much as 30 mana or more.
But it can also "backfire" and do like -15 mana to you as well.

- Fallohide hobbits are talented at smoking pipeweed, and never backfire
  it, and tend to get more mana smoking.

It's useful for casters and non-casters alike (with only a spell or 2).
Pipeweed never decays. Pipes can hold many more smokes then just one
pipeweed, try putting alot in your pipe.

- Pipeweed is common in some parts of the Shire and around the village
  of Staddle in Breeland. Also in some herbalist and smoking shops in
  game.

`get pipe pack, put weed pipe, rem shield, hold pipe, rest, smoke, stand, rem pipe`

### Alchemist Potions:

There is a hidden Alchemist in **Fornost** that can make some
**potions**. One is an aging potion that will make you **ancient** in
**age** (not recommended for playing). He also regularly performs
experiments from time to time and will drop a strange potion when he is
done with it. If you drink one of these potions, it will might give you
penalties and benefits randomly to your abilities. Beware, they can come
with MORE penalties then benefits. Like maybe + 1 **Constitution** but
-2 **Willpower** and -2 **Perception** as an example.

### Softly glowing green cup:

This is a **quest** reward you get from a ghost south of Lorien. The
ghost only comes out at night. The cups do not ever decay. It provides a
few minutes of enhanced **mana** and mana regen. A great potion for
casters.

### Flask of Miruvor:

This very rare potion is only granted from a few elf mobs in the game.
Either for doing a quest or for turning some evil items to be destroyed.
It is a regen potion, that helps you recover hits, mana, and moves for a
few minutes. They do not decay.

### Orkish flasks:

There are a few types of orkish flasks in the game. Rarely some of them
can be found as possible loot. They generally are not a good idea for
People of the West to consume. They can lower your hits at the benefit
of some moves or move regen. But might have side effects like making you
puke, sick, or poisoned. They decay after a long time.

### Scrolls:

Not potions, but still a one shot magical item. They have a variety of
effects that mimic spells in the game. Such as **Heal**, **Breath of
Brisknes**s, **Fear**, **Sanctuary**, **Bless** and others. Some scrolls
might even have a dangerous spell linked to them, like **Poison**. A few
scrolls cast multiple spells at the same time. Scrolls are generally
"end game" loot, and mostly only accessible from very difficult
supermobs in the game.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Ways of Learning an Herblore**

There 2 main ways to learn an herblore in MUME. You must either do a
quest for a mob or find and loot an herblore recipe. Once you
successfully do a **quest** or **read** an herblore from a recipe, your
character now knows it from then on. You do not ever lose the knowledge
of how to make an herblore, even if you die.

**Quest**: Several mobs in the game have a quest where you can learn how
to **mix** an herblore. Some of these quests are easy, and some require
more work. Several of them are level scaling quests. Which means the
**quests** get harder and more difficult if you try to do them at higher
levels, or easier at lower levels.

Some herblores are only learnable by certain races or side of the war.
There are orc specific herblores for example. Or a quest only accessible
by the Free People.

**Loot Recipe**: These herblores require reading something to learn
them, instead of having a mob show you how to make them. It could be a
note, a book, a parchment, a plaque, or other form of writing that
contains the knowledge of how to make that herblore. Some of them you
loot from the corpse of a mob, others might be in a chest that is
difficult to get access to or open.

Once nice thing about looting a Recipe is that you have some more
options once you get one. You can **read** it if you don't know it. Or
you can give it away, sell it, or trade it to other players in the game.
Some recipes are not worth very much, but some are much more valuable. A
few books are heavy, but most of them do not weight much. Some of these
recipes are rentable and some are not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Mixing an Herblore**

In order to **mix** an herblore, you need to have an herbal **kit** or a
crude **kit**. Your success in making an herblore is heavily based off
of your **Wisdom**. If you have high **Wisdom**, you will regularly
**mix** herblores with ease. If you have a low **Wisdom**, you might
fail over 30% of the time, possibly more.

**Mishmash**: This is the message you will get if you put the wrong
ingredients into a **kit** and tried to **mix** it. It is also the
message you will get if you fail trying to make an herblore. Mishmash
wastes all of the ingredients in the herbal kit and uses them up. It can
be disappointing if you messed up with some hard to get or rare
ingredients. Some players even give ingredients to others with higher
**Wisdom** for a better chance of getting the herblore mixed.

**Herbal kits**: Herbal kits load in a few rooms of the game and on a
very few mobs. Mostly characters go and buy them from a general shop or
maybe an herbalist shop. The herbal kit must be held or worn to be used
in making an herblore. You can wear an herbal kit in a belt slot.

You can type **help kit** to learn more about what you can do with an
herbal **kit**.

help kit Help on how to use an enhanced herbal kit: "put \<ingredient\>
kit" put ingredients in the kit "mix kit" mixes the ingredients in the
kit, producing something new (and possibly useful) "look kit" shows you
the description of the kit "examine kit" shows what you have put in the
kit so far

Note that you have to **hold** or **wear** the kit for these to work.

See also **help herblores**.

Herbal kit upgrades: Herbal kits can be upgraded very similar to
lockpicks. This allegedly has two different effects. You can very
randomly and with a small chance possibly make a bonus potion when
mixing a lore. So you would get 2 potions or 2 mugs with just one
mixing. It also is supposed to help increases your chances of
successfully making an herblore.

Most of the herbal kit upgrades in the game are obtained by some type of
quest or bringing some items to a specific mobs in the game.

This is an example of what some of the enhanced herbal kits may look
like, in game this would be referred to as a +4 herbal kit. This kit has
4 upgrades:

look kit This bag is made of thin, soft leather. Inside, the bag holds
several simple tools wrapped in woolen cloth, and an assortment of small
containers, bottles, vials, and bowls. Seven pockets line the inside of
the bag. You look into the pockets and see: An exquisite retort of
polished copper. A handful of small, silvery bottles and vials. A
sharp-edged shining sickle. A delicate set of translucent glass
measuring cups.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Herblore Commands**

**Crush**: Many plants and herbs in the game are crushable. Using the
**crush** command you can take a large, heavy plant and turn it into
some leaves or needles that weigh just a few ounces. Most herblores use
the crushed version of a plant.

A low, many-branched shrub covers the ground here. get plant inv You are
carrying: a many-branched shrub crush plant You start crushing the
shrub. You have produced some scented crushed leaves. You are carrying:
some scented crushed leaves

**Herblore**: The **herblore** command actually has several different
functions. If you just type herblore it will list out all the herblores
you know. It will also show you what lores you can make and how many
from the ingredients on your character.

If you type **herblore** <name of lore> it will show you the information
about the lore, such as what ingredients and how many you need. It will
also give a general description of what the herblore does when you
drink/eat it. Or if you have enough ingredients to make a lore you can
type **herblore** <name of lore> to "auto mix" it. It has a longer
delay, but will gather all of the ingredients you have, put them in the
kit and mix them for you.

You know the following herblores: Belladonna Seeing Soothing-Draught
Baker Leaf-Cake Shadows Walking You have enough ingredients to mix the
following herblores: Baker Ã 1 Seeing Ã 2 Shadows Ã 2

**Mix**: The **mix** command is used to actually make the herblore, if
you have **put** all of the ingredients into your herbal kit. So put
leaves kit, put berries kit, put flower kit, mix. You can use the mix
command OR use the herblore <name of lore> short cut. Either one will
make the herblore for you. Using **mix** is a faster delay, but still a
delay.

**Drink or Quaff**: Most herblore products you **drink** (a few you
eat). The **quaff** command will let you drink a potion even if you are
already full of water, so you can still gain the benefits (and
penalties).

When you are done with an herblore there is sometimes a container left
behind. An empty flask or bowl, for example. Simply **drop** them or
**hide** them. Once used they are just useless weight. Some herblores
don't leave behind containers.

**Envenom**: This is the skill that is used to pour or smear poison onto
weapons from poison vials. You cannot even attempt to poison weapons
without pracs in envenom. If you fail the envenom attempt, you are also
dosed with the poison you are trying to use. You can practice this skill
to a low % in **Tharbad**, but higher from a special guild master NE of
**Rivendell**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Herblore Effects**

Most herblores do not just give you an out right bonus without some sort
of penalty. To see SOME of these negative effects type info to see if
the herblore lowered any of your abilities. Food herblores have no
penalties. And poison vials only give you a penalty if you are affected
by the poison.

**Benefits and Penalties**: The vast majority of herblores in the game
come with a side effect. Sure, it might raise your move regen by +7 but
it will lower your **Willpower** by -3. Or it might give you +2% DB, but
it will lower your **Constitution** by -1. To see SOME of these negative
effects type **info** to see if the herblore lowered any of your
abilities. Most herblores do not just give you an out right bonus
without some sort of penalty. Also some herblores only give you the
penalty after the duration of the good benefits run out.

**Duration**: This is how long the herblore lasts for, even poisons have
a duration as they fade away. Some herblores are quite fast, and only
last a few minutes of play time. Some herblores can last for three
entire MUME days. Also a few herblores have a "cooldown" between how
often you can use them. Also some herblores don't work if you are
already under the effect of that herblore.

**Fading**: Related to duration, some herblores do not just abruptly
end, but fade away. It might go from +2% DB to +1% or the move regen
fade from +5 to +3. So the effects lesson over time. A few herblores
give you the benefits for a short period of time first, THEN as it fades
gives you the penalties of the herblore for a short period of time.

**Stacking**: Herblores "stack" or can be used with any other spell
effects or effects from other magical items in the game. However MANY
herblores can NOT be used while you have another herblore effect up. So
trying to stack herblores benefits is very difficult due to how many of
them don't work when others are up. So trying to use a healing herblore
and a strength herblore at the same time might not work well.

Poisons are an exception to this rule, you can get as many poisons on
you as you want too.

You can eat the two food lore herblores anytime you are not stuffed
full.

It will give you this information in your **stat** command, if you
currently have an herblore active.

Affected by: - potion

**Decay**: Many herblore products in the game are rentable, but beware,
they will decay. Some herblores decay fast. After you mix them, you
better be prepared to use them. Some herblores last for an hour or more
after you make them. It is pretty varied, so learn how long the herblore
products last so you can learn how to best plan their use. One thing is
for sure, that antidote potion you mixed will decay about 5 minutes
before you get poisoned... and then really need it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Herblore Ingredients**

These are what you need to make an herblore in your herbal kit. Some
herblores only require 3 ingredients while others may take as many as 5.
One issue is a few herblore ingredients will decay after you pick them,
so you might need to be ready to mix quickly.

### Plants

Most herblores in the game use products from plants. Most of these
plants need to be crushed first before you use them, but a few you do
not **crush** first. The plant ingredients could be berries, leaves, or
needles. Word of warning about berries, several types of them decay
somewhat fast before you use them.

### Roots

A few herblores in the game are made with a root of a plant. Sometimes
you will see a hint of the plant above the ground to know the root is
there, but very often you will not see that hint above ground. You need
to type **reveal root** to pull the root up. You can try using the
**search** command, but **reveal** a better choice.

### Fungus

A few herblores use some type of mushroom as an ingredient. You don't
crush them first just use the whole mushroom. Most of these you can just
pick up off the ground.

### Animals

Some herblore use products from animals. It could be honey, fur, a tail,
some flesh, or blood.

Only the honey needs to be crushed first to use.

You will need to **butcher** corpses to get some of these ingredients.

Only Saruon's followers can **drain** a corpse of blood, and then you
need an evil priest to help preserve it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Herblore Starting Tips**

Here are just a few herblores to maybe help you get started. This will
not be a list of all the herblores in the game. Just a suggestion of
some you may want to try to get. Some of these are quests that get more
challenging and scale up as you level. So better to try the quest out at
lower levels when they are easier.

**Aldereon's quest**: Aldereon is an elf with a village named after him,
Aldereon's Village. It is NW of Greenholm and SE of Tower Hills. He
wants some help with writing his friends, and will teach you a Walking
herblore for helping him out. This herblore helps with move regen.

**Nodri's quest**: Nodri is a dwarf in Blue Mountains that is a
collector. He wants you to get him some items and in exchange he will
teach you a Soothing Draught herblore for helping him out. This herblore
helps with hit regen.

**Lonely giant quest**: This giant wanders the Shire and can be found in
several different areas, crying. If you comfort him he may give you a
quest to find some ingredients or herbs for him. If find them, he will
teach you a Baker herblore for helping him out. This herblore makes alot
of very light weight, very filling food. Bonus, the bannocks you
**cook** can also be sold at grocers. Good way to make piles of silver.

**Road to Fornost**: Along the Road to Fornost, going north from Bree,
are two more challenging areas that can sometimes load books that can
teach about herblores. These books teach the Seeing herblore, for
raising your **Perception**. Also the Shadows herblore, for casting the
**shroud** spell (once) and helping you **dodge** slightly better.

So go out and see what you can find or learn about from other players.
If you see someone mixing with an herbal kit, ask them about which
herblore they are mixing! If you gather some ingredients for one, ask
someone else to mix it if you don't have them yet. Some players don't
bother with herblores much (often because weight issues or a very low
Wisdom). Some players collect herblores and mix them alot.

Don't forget, selling herblore ingredients to other players or herbal
shops for cash can be a good way to make some silver. Also most grocery
shops will buy berries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")

[Category:Guides](Category:Guides "wikilink") [Category:Newbie
Help](Category:Newbie_Help "wikilink")