---
title: Newbie Guide Making Gold
---

**Newbie Guide Making Gold**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo), help from p(Amund)

"If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it
would be a merrier world.‚Äù

Thorin Oakenshield, King Under the Mountain, JRRT, The Hobbit

The goal of this guide is to help newer players to get **coins** and
make gold.

Many parts of this guide reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at:

<https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**sell**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Types of Currency**

First is about the **coins** in the game themselves. Depending on what
race you play the **coins** may have names in a different language, such
as the elven tongues.

**Copper = busc, Silver = Celeb, Gold = Lauren**

The rates of conversion between coins. **100 copper = 1 silver, 20
silver = 1 gold**

There are other types of treasures as well, such as silver rings, gems,
jewels, jewelry, etc...

Many types of treasure in MUME are simply that, treasure to sell. There
ARE some magical rings, necklaces, crowns, but they are VERY rare and
hard to get.

You can sell rings, gems, silver goblets, gold bars, silver nuggets,
etc... in any jewelry shop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Where are Coins?**

One source of earning coins is to complete a **quest** in the game. Many
**quests** give **coins** as a reward, or give items that you may end up
selling for some money.

Another is looting coins from different areas of the **map**. Some rooms
load coins simply laying on the ground, just type **get coins**. In
other rooms they may be hidden and you have to **reveal coin**.
Sometimes the coins will load in a container, such as a box, crate,
chest, etc. You might have to **open** the container to **examine** it
first, or even need to **pick** it **open** if it's locked.

Coins also load on many of the humanoid mobs in the game. They often
have copper and silver coins to loot, and rarely gold coins. Other
treasures such as gold or silver rings can be found as well. Sometimes
these treasures may load in a pouch or a **backpack**, so you might want
to loot those and **examine** them as well. **Get** coins corpse will
get all of the coins on a corpse.

`exam corpse, exam 2.corpse, exam 3.corpse, exam chest, get all sarcophagus, pick chest, open chest`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Tips for Saving Money**

One way to keep gold in your pocket is to not spend it in the first
place. For example several towns in the game have pet shops where you
can **buy** mounts. But some of these **mounts** are very expensive for
a new character. Mounts load for free in many areas of the game, so
using free **mounts** is a fast way to save money. Ponies, donkeys (not
a very good mount), mules, and pack horses load on farms, ranches,
stables, and other areas. Learning a few mount load spots can save you
alot of money.

**Rent** has been recently adjusted to be more affordable. But you can
still do some things to lower your renting costs. **Wear**ing your most
expensive gear when you rent, reduces the price of your rent. Also
hoarding and holding on to lots of gear or items can raise your **rent**
price. So if you can, **sell** extra items before you rent. You can
always use the **offer** command at an **inn** to check to see how much
it will cost you.

Free food loads in many places in the game, homes, camps, in stoves,
crates, farms, even in towns. There are even berries, fruits, and
vegetables that load in many areas. You can always **butcher** a corpse
and **eat** meat for free. Eating for free saves you a little money.
Drinking from wells springs, rivers, and fountains is also free.

Lastly, free gear loads in many areas of the map. A free pail or water
skin, free blankets, lanterns, large sacks, rope, torches,
**whetstone**s, etc... Even items like saddles, swords, and shields can
be found if you know where to **look**. And if you are not going to use
it, you can always **sell** it.

Speaking of **whetstone**, you can use them to sharpen and **mend**
swords, daggers, axes, spears, etc for free. Instead of paying to have a
weapon **shop** **mend** them for you.

**Hold** the stone in your hand or **wear** the stone on your belt to
use it. Then type **whet**. When you **whet** a weapon it is a delayed
command and takes a little bit of time and some moves. Whetting also
forces you to **sit** down, so **stand** back up when you get the
message your weapon is finished.

`wear stone belt, whet, stand`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Protecting your Gold**

Several mobs in the game can **steal** your coins, from a few silver up
to many gold coins. The chance for them to successfully **steal** from
you is based off of your **Perception** and any practices you have in
**Awareness** skill. They can only steal coins from your pockets, so to
protect them you can use a **moneybag**. You can buy a **moneybag** from
some **shops**, or loot one off of a mob in the game. Moneybags can be
put in other containers you have, say a sack or a backpack or worn on
your belt. Moneybags can hold up to 100 gold coins, but can even hold
other treasures such as valuable gems or rings. If coins are in a
**moneybag** mobs cannot **steal** those **coins** from you.

`wear moneybag belt, put 12 gold moneybag, get 5 gold moneybag, put gem moneybag`

## **Manage Your Gear**

Use the **inventory** command to check and see what you are carrying
whenever you need too.

Use the **equipment** command to check and see what you are wearing
whenever you need too.

### Containers

If you are looting alot of items, using **containers** can be very
useful. Backpacks and large sacks are often used for this. You can
**put** alot of light weight or many medium weight items in a
**backpack** or large sack before it is full. That increases the number
of items you can carry. Beware this also might lead to carrying too much
weight.

`put all.dagger backpack, put all.leaves sack, get all.shield sack, put flask pack`

### Weight

Be careful carrying TOO MUCH **WEIGHT**!! It is a very very common issue
with newbies and new players. Carrying too much **weight** causes you
to:

- fail **flee** more often, meaning you can't get away from a fight

<!-- -->

- lowers your DB or **dodge bonus**, meaning you get hit more in a fight

<!-- -->

- increases how fast you use up **movement points**, or moves, mps,
  which means you get tired faster, and need to **rest** ALOT more

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Looting Items to Sell**

One thing to keep in mind while **sell**ing at shops is an items
**weight**. Some items might sell for a couple of silver, but could
weigh over 16 pounds! That is very heavy loot to carry around! It's
often much more efficient to carry more light weight items to **sell**.
So a barrel full of beer is worth some money, but not really worth the
weight for how heavy it is. A simple chest can **sell** for 8 silver,
but it's very heavy to haul it miles back to town. Same with boats. If
you are really hard up for silver, you can still try selling those items
if you need to. If you are worried about how heavy an item is for
looting you can always **consider** item, which will tell you it's
weight.

You can use con for short abbreviation for **consider**.

`con shield, con sword, con barrel`

### Mount for Looting Assistance

Using a **mount** to help you haul loot is also very popular. You can
give heavier items to a mount to carry, like shields or axes you've
looted. Then later when you are near a store, you can **unsaddle** those
items from the mount so you can sell them. To see what items your mount
is carrying, just **examine** mount. An important part of this process
is to **label** your mount. It is very easy to confuse one pack horse
with another, and **label**ing helps to keep it organized.

Mounts are pretty strong and can easily carry 10 longswords without any
problems, for example.

`give all.shield mule, unsaddle sack pony, unsaddle all.sword horse`

### Alias

**Alias** can make looting to much faster, and you will likely see other
players doing this.

Some examples of **alias** you might want to try:

alias for get coins all.corpse: `alias gc get all.coins all.corpse`

alias for exam corpse: `alias ec examine &.corpse`

alias for butcher corpse: `alias bc butcher &.corpse`

Some players even set **alias** for get all.shield all.corpse or get
all.sword all.corpse

Another, more generic alias would be: `alias loot get all.& room.all`

Using it: `loot sword`, which expands to `get all.sword room.all`,
taking all swords from all containers in the room, including corpses,
chests, skeletons etc.

Just typing `loot` will take *everything* from *all* containers in the
room.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Making Money by Selling at Shops**

The primary way, other then looting, for making money is by **sell**ing
items at **shops**.

There are many types of **shops** in the game: weapon shop, armour shop,
combination weapon and armour shop, herbalist, grocer, general and/or
traveler shops, tailors, and jewelery shops.

There are even some specialty **shops** that are somewhat more specific
like: archery shops, boat captains that buy and sell boats, pet shops
(don't **buy** only **sell**), pawn shops, bartenders, bakers, smoking
shops, or even a poison vendor!

Some **shops** only **sell** items, and will not **buy** anything from
you. Some **shops** are very picky about what the will buy and what they
won't. Most specialty shops only **buy** very specific items, such as
boats at a captain, or plants and herbs at an herbalist. Some shops are
less choosy about what they **buy** like some of the pawn shops or
grocers. A few **shops** tend to not buy items from certain **races** in
the game, like most elf shops refuse orkish items. If you are not sure
if a shop will buy something or not, there is a command for that. The
**value** command will let you know if they will buy it AND how much
money they will offer for it if they will buy it.

`buy lantern, sell sword, sell all.shield, sell all.fur, value axe`

This is just a list of examples of all the items you can possibly
**sell** at shops: berries, mushrooms, weapons, shields, armour, cloaks,
belts, pelts and furs, musical instruments, metal ores (heavy), barrels
(heavy), rings, cooked meats, and much much more!!!

One thing to be aware of is the condition of items can really effect the
price you can get at a shop. Type **help states** to learn more about
it. Weapons and armour that are fresh and flawless sell for MUCH MORE
then the same item that is neglected and old. In fact if some gear is in
really bad shape, you might just skip it for looting because the price
may not be worth the **weight**.

For selling shields and armour there are some patterns to the prices.
Here is a list of some general guidelines going from cheapest to items
with a better price.

armour: cloth -\> soft leather -\> rigid leather -\> chain mail/scale
mail -\> metal

armour: normal -\> sturdy -\> fine

So a cheap piece of armour would be a normal soft leather gloves. A very
valuable armour would be a fine metal greaves.

shield: target -\> small -\> large -\> full -\> large+full -\> wall

shield: wooden -\> metal

So a cheap shield would be a small wooden target shield. A valuable
shield would be a large metal full shield (flawless).

There are many other shields and armours in the game. A good way to get
an idea of how expensive some of them are is to type **list** in an
armour shop and look for patterns in cost. Generally the price goes up
as the weight goes up for shields and armour. One really good metal
shield can easily be worth 9-10 smaller damaged wooden shields.

`list shield, list fine leather, list chain, list fine metal, list gloves, list fine boots`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Other ways to make some gold**

Some other ways to make money other then looting gear is **mine**,
**butcher**, and **fishing**.

### Butchering

When you **butcher** animals you'll very often get some meat and maybe
some furs or pelts. Furs and pelts are somewhat heavy, but a pile of
them can sell for alot of silver. Selling pelts and furs is a very
common way for many lowbies to make some silver. Look for animals like
deer, otters, martens, stags, lynx, and types of wolves. Tanner shops,
trapper shops, general shops, traveler shops, and some grocery shops
will buy furs and pelts.

You can also **give** wolf and warg furs to secretaries in cities for
some silver coin rewards.

Meat does not **sell** for very much. If you **cook** it to smoke it, or
cook it with **salt** to cure it, the price goes up and it gets lighter
to carry. Use a **pan** and a **campfire**, and maybe some **salt** to
try to get more copper and silver out of your cooking.

### Fishing

**Fishing** is another slow way of making copper and maybe silver. Get a
fishing rod and head to some near by water. You can also **cook** the
fish you catch too.

`butcher corpse, butcher 2.corpse, hold rod, fish, use net, get net, cook fish, cook raw`

### Mining

Mining is another way to make some money, check out help **mining**. You
will need a pick or a mattock to mine, and a way to carry the ore. Alot
of ore can get heavy fast. Also check to make sure which shops will buy
the ore before you do too much mining. Some shops will not buy raw ore.
It takes alot of **movement points** to do some **mining**, so you might
need to **rest** now and again. The rooms in caves, mines, and tunnels
you choose to mine it has a LARGE impact on the quality of ore. So if
you find a room that's a good spot, make note of it. But don't spend too
much time in a room that isn't give you very good results. It will
mostly waste time and moves. Pack up and move to a new room or even a
new cave or mine to try your luck again.

Here the pattern of least to most valuable mining results:

mining: iron ore (most common) -\> copper ore -\> silver nuggets (rare)
-\> gold nuggets (very rare)

`hold pick, mine, put all.ore sack`

### Picking Herbs

Another wonderful way to make some money is herbalist shops! Herbs are a
great way to make piles and piles of silver. The primary reason is they
are very light weight, you can carry alot of them back to town to
**sell** at the herbalist. Some plants you just get right up off the
ground, but most plants will need crushed first. Type **crush** plant
when you find one to check to see if it crushes. A picked plant might
weight like 3-4 pounds, but after it is crushed the leaves weigh very
little and sell for often the same amount, maybe even more. So keep an
eye out for plants, a majority of them sell, and some for a very good
price. Some flowers and plants won't sell, but you can figure them out
as you try to make money.

It may seem silly to carry around 10 clover or 10 water lilies, but when
you make a pile of silver, you might change your mind.

Also pipeweed, salt, and pepper sells well at herbal shops!

`get plant, crush plant, sell all.leaves, reveal root`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Spending Gold: "I Made Money, Now What Do I Do With It?"**

The first thing to make sure you have money for is **rent**ing. If you
are rented at an **inn** and do not have enough money to cover your
**rent**, the innkeepers will take all of your gear to cover the cost of
your rent. You can buy it back but it is expensive and there is a time
limit. So be sure you have money enough to cover your **rent** costs.

When spending money at shops, you really do not need to worry about any
thing that costs only copper or a few silver. Those items are CHEAP.
Don't worry about the small costs, because selling one sword or shield
can probably **buy** you a brand new **lantern** and 10 flasks of oil
and still have silver left over.

Next **buy** any adventuring gear you do not have. Make sure you have a
belt, a hunting knife or a butcher knife, a water skin, a **lantern**
with a spare flask of oil, a good pair of boots. Being stuck in the dark
or not being able to butcher can really slow you down.

`buy belt, wear belt, wear knife belt, wear skin belt, wear flask belt, wear lantern belt`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Taking Care of Gear**

You will also want to make sure you have some money for mending armour
and shields at the shop. Cheaper items costs much less to **mend**, but
metal items and some shields can be expensive to **mend**. Mending can
take several minutes while you wait for the shop to finish the work. You
can mend multiple items at a time, so if you taking the time many
players just mend their entire set of armour at once. Don't forget to
return BACK to the shop to pick up your items after mending (and don't
**sneak**, the armour probably can't see you to give you your items
back) (or don't **shroud** they might not see you).

Also mending is very important to get the best benefits out of your
items. If your axe or sword is dented or damaged, it will start to do
less damage per hit. If your shield is in bad shape, it will give you
less PB (**parry** bonus) then if can if repaired. Same with cloaks,
keep them mended to get the most DB (**dodge** bonus) out of them.

You might also need to **resize** armour and shields as you find some
upgrades, which can cut into your budget a little bit. **Resize** is
very fast and the item will fit you after the shop is done with it.

Next get a good weapon that you are planning on using. That is how you
will get most of your starting xp. A shield for defense, it raises your
PB (**parry** bonus) It is just fine if you don't have the best weapon
and shield in the game. You'll earn enough over time to upgrade what you
do have. You can always sell the old ones at a shop when you are done
with them. If you are planning on using a bow, you'll also have to
budget for arrows because they can break or become lost. But don't worry
too much, over all arrows are pretty affordable. Some areas even have
arrows that load for free!

`rem all.chain, mend all.chain, rem shield, mend shield, resize boots`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Good Purchases**

A very popular item that many players save up for is a magical 'red
ruby'. It is a somewhat common magical item that is very light
**weight**. You can wear it in a neck slot, freeing up a belt slot, or
wear it on your belt. It permanently glows with a magical light, so you
can get rid of your heavy lantern and flasks of oil. Which means you can
carry more loot! A very useful upgrade especially for lower strength
characters.

Shop for red ruby in jewelry stores.

There is a jewelry shop in Blue Mountains, Grey Havens Forlond,
Rivendell, and Lorien. There is also one in Tharbad, but you will likely
die trying to get to it at low levels.

You might also want to buy a more expensive mount at a **pet** shop and
a **saddle** for it. Also renting mounts at a **stable** costs some
silver. Stables are very commonly close to the **inn** in a town. It
does save you having to run around and trying to find free mounts, and
it's always right there and ready to go as soon as you are. Mounts
rented at a stable keep their saddles on as well.

You might need a few silver to cover some travel expenses. There are
some ferries in the game that cost silver for a ride. Also **coach**
tickets you can buy to travel from Fornost to Bree to Tharbad, with
stops in between. You must have a new ticket every time you enter the
**coach** to ride.

Save up for **citizenship**s. Bree, Fornost, and Tharbad all cost gold
to get a citizenship in. Bree and Fornost both cost 1 gold per level, so
you can save money by buying them early. There might be some quests you
can find that can help you get a Bree **citizenship** as well. Tharbad
citizenship is very expensive, so you'll need to save up if you want
that one. Many characters never purchase a Tharbad citizenship.

You can also spend money trying to **bribe** the guards in Tharbad to
see if they will let you in, even if you are not a citizen.

`say citizenship, give 4 gold secretary, give 4 lauren secretary`

Some players also purchase pets or hire mercenaries to help them in a
fight. A **mercenary** asks for payment every day they are with you. You
can hire more then one **mercenary**. Having a team of mercenaries with
you can add up to alot of silver over a few game days... so be sure you
have enough gold to afford them!

Pets only cost money the first time you buy them, and if you rent them
at a **stable**, some silver to get them back out. You will be given a
ticket for your pet or mount. **Trade** ticket at a stable to get them
back out.

There are many other things you might need to save up money for. Buying
lockpicks or even upgrading lockpicks after you buy them. Upgrading your
gear in shops, like your cloak, or shield, or armour. Using money to
trade with other players for items. Maybe even buying your way into an
exclusive guild to practice. Saving some silver for buying a ticket for
a trip on the **coach**, or some silver for a **ferry** ride.

It is always better to have some extra gold then to run out and not have
enough.

Now go out there and make some money!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Some Advanced Money making Tips**

A few quick pro tips to making some money, some of these might require
not being naked.

Learn the baker **herblore** from the lonely giant quest in the Shire.
If you make bannocks from this **herblore**, you can sell 8 of them for
over a gold. Once you have the herblore it's not much effort to make a
gold here and there. You'll need an herbal kit.

Try selling other potions you've made with an herbal kit, or offer your
mixing services.

You can sell boats, rafts, canoes to Captains. There is a Captain in GH
Forlond, and 3 of them in the Shire. (careful boats are heavy!!)

If you are killing humanoid mobs, many of them load at least some coins,
and some gear. Ruffians, bandits, brigands, thieves, muggers, footpads,
smugglers, robbers are all good sources of coins. But be ready for a
fight, and maybe alot of flees. Some of these mobs are cowards as they
get hurt in battle.

Don't waste your time, space on your mount, or weight you can carry on
gear or equ that isn't worth much. Clothes and soft leather generally
are NOT worth your time to sell. You will only get like 60 copper for
some of it anyways. If you are hard up for cash, anything that will sell
for over 5 silver was probably worth your time and typing to loot. Just
pay attention and learn items worth looting after you sell them.

Try out the Pawn shop in MD in the Shire. Buys several items that other
shops will not buy.

There are also some 'shady' shops to try and sell gear at: one in
Fornost, one in Bree, and one just east of Grey Havens

Some items in the game are even no sell, and not worth looting at all.

The Tanner mob in the south part of the Shire can make items if you
bring him any wolf furs: black, grey, or white. The wolfskin wristbands
he makes sell for several silver and are very light to carry. He can
also craft a belt from snakeskin. So if you are near Shire and got some
wolf furs or snake skin, it's an OK stop. Also takes some time for him
to make them, so go get a drink, or better yet, read more hints, help
files, and guides!

Some quests in the game are repeatable! Not all quests are, but some of
them are. You might be able to get the reward every zone repop in some
cases. They don't always give the xp again, but you can often repeat
them for more quest rewards.

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")

[Category:Guides](Category:Guides "wikilink") [Category:Newbie
Help](Category:Newbie_Help "wikilink")