---
title: Newbie Guide for Missile Weapons
permalink: /Newbie_Guide_for_Missile_Weapons/
---

**Newbie Guide to Missile Weapons**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

"To Legolas she gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used. The bow was
longer and stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, and it was strung with a
string of elf-hair."

JRRT, The Fellowship of the Ring

This guide is about using bows, crossbows, and slings with the Missile
skill.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like **help
shoot**.

# **Missile Skills**

The following suggested skills are NOT required to use missile weapons.
Anyone can pick up a sling or bow and just start shooting. They will
help you shoot better or maybe xp better when choosing to use a bow.

Some characters just use a missile weapon for a few lower levels, then
switch to using different weapons or spells later. Some characters use a
missile weapon as an occasional back up. Some characters use missile
weapons as their primary weapon. Any way of doing it is fine.

You can always use Missile skill for a few levels, and then decay the
skill later and get your practices back, if you just want to try it out,
or use it for a few lower levels.

Here are some skills that will help out anyone using missile weapons.
Over all scout or thief characters might find them more useful, but
anyone can try them out and decay them later.

### **Missile**

This Thief guild skill is the primary skill used for a shooter. For
every 5% you practice Missile skill your M_OB goes up by 1%. M_OB stands
for Missile Offensive Bonus and only applies when you are wielding
missile weapons. The higher your M_OB the greater the chance you will
hit a target with a missile weapon. You also might break your string
less often or break an arrow less often.

Any item or spell that raises OB will also help M_OB, but raising your
Str score will not help your M_OB go any higher. So items like 'fine
soft leather gloves' or 'golden mantle' can still help out with
shooting. Or a spell like Bless helps as well.

### **Escape**

This Thief guild skill lets you escape from combat instead of flee from
combat. That helps you avoid getting the -panic flag. The -panic flag
lowers your OB some. You can also get to choose which direction you want
to leave the fight, like escape east, or escape down. It does have a
delay before you leave the fight, so sometimes you might want to use the
flee command instead.

Escape also reduces the delay you get from being rescued in a fight. So
you can assist or shoot faster after being rescued.

### **Attack**

This Thief guild skill slightly helps you attempt flees faster, so it
can slightly help you get out of a fight if you need too. Other then
slightly better flees, it doesn't help missile weapons at all.

### **Dodge**

This Thief guild skill helps increase your DB. For every 5% Dodge skill
you practice your DB goes up by 1%. The more you **dodge** attacks, the
more missile hits you can potentially get in.

### **Parry**

This Warrior guild skill helps increase your PB. For every 5% Parry
skill you practice your PB goes up by 1%. The more you **parry**
attacks, the more missile hits you can potentially get in. Also, PB can
be a struggle with missile weapons as they do not come with any weapon
Parry Bonus.

### **Wilderness**

This Ranger guild skill helps you use movement points more efficiently
in some types of terrain. When you are shooting, you might need to
**flee** or **sneak** around some, and this can help your moves last a
little bit longer.

### **Endurance**

This Warrior guild skill slightly can help your movement regen. And
movement points are important for shooting and moving in and out of
rooms.

# **Missile Commands**

**wield or draw**: these commands are used to wield or draw your bow,
even from your shoulder

**wear**: this command helps you wear quivers on your back or belt

**put or get**: you can put arrows in a quiver or get them back out if
needed

**recover**: this command will find, get, and put any missile
**ammunition** you fired in the room back in to your missile
**container** (quiver, bolt case, pouch). If the ammunition is on the
ground or on any corpses, this command will grab them. If the missile is
still on a living target, it will not get them. Corpse shadows also
block **recover** command. This command has a short delay.

**recover all**: this command will find, get, and put any missiles it
can find in the room back into your missile container, even if someone
else fired them. This command has a short delay.

**shoot**: the most important command for missile, it must be used EACH
TIME you want to fire an arrow, very normal to use shoot 6 times or more
in a fight to kill a target. This command has a delay depending on the
missile weapon shooting speed. If you get hit while trying to shoot,
that shot is cancelled. It can seem very spammy using a command this
much, but that's how missile weapons work.

**load**: a crossbow only command, lets you pre-load a bolt before a
fight, has a slight delay to load the bolt, cannot be done in combat

**reveal**: the command **reveal stone** helps you find more slingstone
ammunition, you have a much better chance to reveal some stones in some
rooms over others

**escape**: this command can be used with the Escape skill to leave
combat in what direction you wish without -panic

## **Archery Targets**

There are archery **target** in several cities or towns in the game. You
can practice your missile skill at these targets and using the missile
commands. They don't break your arrows, and gives a good chance to get
an idea of your shooting speed and getting a sequence of using some of
the missile commands in the game.

There are archery targets in Bree, Rivendell, Fornost, Lorien, Rohan
Fort at Eyot, Ingrove, and Goblin Town.

See **help targets**

## **Types of Missile Ammunition**

Every type of missile weapon uses a specific ammunition. If you don't
have the correct ammunition, you can't shoot using that missile weapon.

slingstones: are used with slings. One cool feature with slings is that
you can get free ammunition!! If you are using a sling, type reveal
stone in some rooms for a chance to get find ammunition to use. It's the
easiest **ammunition** to get in the game.

- slingstones and round stone

bolts: are used with crossbows. You can buy them in weapon shops. The
metal-cased bolts can only be purchased in Blue Mountains, so try and
find a nice dwarf and ask them.

- bolts and metal-cased bolts

arrows: are used with bows. You can buy them in weapon shops. They do
load on a few mobs in the game, so check out a quiver if you kill
something with one. War arrows can be purchased in Fornost, ash arrows
in some elf towns like Rivendell or Lorien.

- arrows, war arrows, ash arrows, leaf shaped arrows, fletched arrows,
  silver-tipped arrows

magical or enchanted: some arrows in the game are magical, all
ammunition can be enchanted. If ammunition is magical OR enchanted it is
considered NO BREAK. That means that the missile will never break no
matter how many times you shoot with it. There is a quest in Bree from
the fletcher to get a quiver of no break leaf-shapped arrows.

## **Types of Missile Containers**

All missile weapons require a **container** for your **ammunition**. You
can actually put ammunition into any containers, like a backpack or a
large sack. But it will only shoot correctly if put in the correct
missile container. The missile containers only work with the commands if
worn on your back or worn on your belt.

You can also use missile containers to old other items as well, but it
takes up space that you could be using with your missiles. So, sure you
can put bread in our quiver, but doesn't really do you any good to do
so.

It is fine to mix ammunition types in a missile container. For example
you can have bolts and metal-cased bolts in a bolt case mixed in. Or ash
arrows with war arrows or normal arrows.

You can wear more then one missile container, say 2 quivers, or a quiver
and a bolt case. If you recover, it will put the appropriate missile
into the correct container.

Your missile container is used with the command **recover**. You recover
ammunition into your missile container the missile was fired from.

leather pouch: used for slingstones with slings

bolt case: used with bolts for crossbows

quiver: used with arrows for bows

## **Types of Missile Weapons**

All missile weapons use the same game commands and the same Missile
skill. But there are reasons to choose some missile weapons over others.
It could be shooting speed, weight, ease of getting ammunition, etc...

slings: they are VERY affordable and cheap to use, and not very heavy.
They also have the benefit of shooting at a very fast rate. They are
also pretty light compared to other missile weapons. But the draw back
here is they are low damage and low OB. A fine missile weapon to use at
lower levels, or when you are broke. But might want to upgrade at later
levels for improved damage and attacks.

crossbows: are heavy, the heaviest option of missile weapons to use. The
bolt cases also do not hold as much ammunition as some other choices.
They also shoot the slowest of all the missile weapons. But the damage
is good. And another benefit, they come with an option that none of the
other missile weapons do, loading. You can load a bolt for the first
shot in a fight, and this first loaded shot shoots very fast. Making
loaded crossbows one of the fastest missile weapons, for one shot only.

bows: over all the most popular missile weapon, decent shooting speed,
medium weight, can also deal out alot of damage. Quivers can also hold
alot of arrows. Most of the types of arrows are fairly easy to get.

## Which Missile Weapon to Use?

Missile weapons have different values that may help you choose which one
is right for you. It could be:

-ease of getting ammunition, like buying more arrows after some break or
reveal slingstones -weight, some are light, while crossbows are heavy
-shooting speed, shortbows are fast and loaded crossbows are fast -OB,
longbows and crossbows tend to have higher OB -damage, longbows and
crossbows tend to have higher damage

## Gear for Shooters

There is gear that is good for shooters, but it is somewhat split up
between solo play where you are tanking while shooting, or shooting
while assisting.

Dodge or DB gear is what is needed if you are tanking and shooting solo.
Higher DB means you get hit less and there for can possibly land more
shots. So cloth gear that raises DB, like plain clothes, forest green
cloaks, and any other way to improve your DB.

Another way to help your DB is to travel light weight. Carrying too many
furs, pelts, meat, or loot will weigh you down reducing your chance to
flee and lower your DB. Get rid of extra weight.

Also, sometimes while solo tank shooting, faster missile weapons are
better, so that would be slings, and types of shortbows. That way you
can get shots in between being hit.

If you are assisting while someone else is tanking, you want more OB,
like fine soft leather gloves, or golden mantle. And longer shoot speed
weapons are good, like a longbow or a crossbow.

There is an item called an archer's wrist guard. This item is +5% M_OB
but -1% PB. Pretty nice for any shooters.

# **Pros and Cons of Missile Weapons**

There are good reasons to use missile weapons and good reasons not to
use them. Some players find that missile weapons really fit their play
style while other players do not care for them much. Also some character
builds are very favorable to using the Missile skill, and others are
not. Missile weapons will be most effective on characters with higher
Dex and Per. This tends to be for scouts, thieves, and defense warriors.
But some casters also use them as a back up choice.

This will be some lists of the pros and cons of using missile weapons in
MUME.

## Pros for Missile Weapons

-attack targets that are not in combat with you - shooters are very good
at attacking targets outside of the combat they are directly working on,
for example, you can shoot that additional large bat that comes in and
joins the combat, and very quickly kill it. Clearing low level parry
splitters is fast and easy to do with missile weapons.

-missile weapons shoot past the "keep at bay" feature of targets
wielding spears, you can shoot right past that special defense and
ignore it, doesn't affect many targets, but still nice.

-vs fleeing mobs - missile weapons are useful vs fleeing mobs. Some mobs
flee as soon as attacked, like rabbits. Others flee after they are <bad>
or <awful>. In both cases missile weapons are very effective against
fleeing mobs. You can get a shot on them before they try to flee.

-xping on low level mobs - little mobs like birds, fleeing animals,
fish, insects, rodents, missile weapons make quick work of at lower
levels. Some players who are making a caster start their character out
as a shooter first, then after a few levels, transition them over to a
caster later.

-even at later levels, some casters in the game find missile weapons as
an effective back up while assisting their tank, to help keep their
damage from being poor

-high damage output and attack speed - over all missile weapons are one
of the top ways to deal damage in the game. The amount of damage they
can dish out is impressive in a short amount of time. This is one of the
main reasons higher level characters sometimes use missile. Over all
missile weapons can achieve some of the higher sustained damage in the
game, with the right gear and pracs.

-missile weapons really shine while assisting - shooting works best when
doing it from behind a tanking character. You are not being hit to
interrupt your shots. This can lead to some impressive assisting damage.

## Cons for Missile Weapons

-string can 'break' - this is the weapon fumble for missile weapons, all
weapons have a fumble chance, for missile weapons it is a delay where
you cannot attack while you quickly repair the missile weapon in combat

-ammunition can break - all missile ammunition can break unless it is
enchanted or magical. This means occasionally having to resupply and
stock up on more arrows to replace those that break. The chance to break
increases if you have low missile practiced or against some types of
mobs. Luckly most missile ammunition are fairly cheap to replace.

-weight - you have to carry a missile weapon, ammunition, and a
container. Seperate these items do not weight too much (except for very
heavy crossbows), but by the time you add them all up it can be quite a
bit of weight: weapon + pile of ammo + container

-mobs or players can flee away, and take your ammunition with them

-it is very easy to forget to recover and leave some of your ammunition
behind OR you had to flee and leave your ammunition behind

-running out of ammunition in combat - exactly what it says, other
weapons never run out of ammo

-corpse shadows prevent recover command - this is one of the main
reasons to NOT play using missile command. Humanoid mobs over lvl 16
have a chance to leave behind a corpse shadow that will prevent you from
getting your ammunition back. This is HIGHLY FRUSTRATING and can even
lead to losing your ammunition in some cases.

-have to spam commands - you have to do a recover command after each
combat encounter, and to attack you have to do spam shoot command for
every single hit. No, there is no auto shoot command. It is also VERY
easy to over spam shoot command and use up some moves.

-being hit interrupts shot - every time you are hit in combat by any
effect, it cancels that shoot command this even includes poison or wound
effects

-effective vs missile - a few mobs in the game are effective against
missiles. This means they take 25% less damage from a missile attack.
And it seems they might have an increased chance to break arrows fired
at them. Over all this is not a huge issue because you simply do so much
damage anyway.

-missile weapons do not help with your Parry Bonus, and do not grant a
weapon PB bonus like a sword might.

## Missile Related Quests

- Grey Havens Elven Trapper

Just north of Grey Havens Forlond is a Hunters Cabin with an elven
trapper. It's a hunting shop that sells missile supplies and buys furs,
skins, and pelts. If you sell enough furs and pelts to the shop, the
elven trapper offers up a quest for you to earn a yew longbow and a
quiver with some ash arrows. It's a pretty decent missile weapon, and is
a good quest for a lower level character.

- Bree Fletcher

In the town of Bree north of the weapon shop is a fletcher who needs
help with getting an order of archery supplies. The quest involves a
trip to Fornost and northern Bree land. You can get a reward of a quiver
with 20 leaf-shaped arrows. The great thing is that these arrows are
magical and NO BREAK. A wonderful start for a lower or mid level
character.

# Advanced Missile Techniques

## Bash shoot

Used by a few scouts and some defense warriors is the bash shoot
technique. You bash a target, then immediately switch over to a missile
weapon, shooting them 2 or 3 times while they are bashed. One reason why
this works well, is while a target is bashed, they are not hitting you.
Which means none of your shots will be interrupted. And missile attacks
tend to do pretty good damage. This technique works well against solo
mobs or targets.

## Blind shoot

This technique is mostly used by cleric characters, especially for
leveling up. Once a target is blinded by the Blind spell, using a
missile weapon against them makes for a really effective combo attack.
Many clerics, cleric/mage combos, and shamans use this missile technique
at one time or another. It can be a very efficient way to gain some
levels for a class that can struggle with getting a fast xp rate.

## Sneak shoot

This sneaky technique is used by some scouts and thieves. You sneak into
a room and shoot a target that won't hit you because they can't see you
(your sneaking). Then after a shot or 2, you can flee or use the Escape
skill to leave combat. Then sneak back in and get another sneaky shot
in. It takes some time, and some moves, but can often let you take down
some mobs you would have difficulty soloing, or would hit you for alot
of damage. This technique works even better if you are using a loaded
crossbow. It's a high damage sneaky hit! It can end up being a great way
to xp.

## Max Perception Shooting

Using a high missile character with a high Perception score can end up
with a higher then average "shoot the gaps in armour" attacks. One way
to push this even further is to combine it with a Seeing Potion for +3
and later +2 to Perception. It is pretty easy to achieve a 20 Per with
this style. You will often shoot for gaps in armour, slightly pushing up
your damage. This works very well when doing assist shooting with a tank
on a high missile character wearing gear that increases OB or M_OB.

## Envenom shot

You can use the Envenom skill on missile ammunition and shoot someone
with a poisoned arrow. This mostly sees action in PK or PvP, and isn't
really used that often with xping. A sneaky, poisoned, loaded crossbow
bolt can be a nasty surprise from an Orc!