---
title: Newbie Guide Campfires and Cooking
tags:
  - Guides
  - Newbie Help
---
**Guide Camping and Campfires and Cooking in MUME**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

Campfires are a very valuable asset to playing MUME. Especially for new
players.

Many parts of this guide reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at:

<https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**camp**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Campfires**

To make a **campfire**, use the command **camp**. It has a delay and
will take a few seconds to build your **campfire**. Any character can do
it, even if you are naked. Campfires are built faster or with a shorter
delay if you have **Wilderness** skill. Campfires eventually burn out,
but if you type **camp** again, you can refresh it with new wood. You
cannot camp in cities, buildings, on open water (rivers, lakes, ocean,
etc), or in some caves. But otherwise you can camp in almost any room
outside in the game, even in swamps and marshes.

Some areas of the game dislike campfires being built there. Beware in
the Forest of Fangorn. The Ents and Huorns there do not like fires being
set in their woods. Type **complain** to see if you have upset the
Forest of Fangorn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **What can campfires help you with?**

Once a campfire is made it has the following benefits:

- It lights up the room and acts as a **light** source.
- You can even build a campfire in the dark.
- It also warms the room up some, raising the temperature. But not
  enough to melt ice.

If it is cold or chilly in a room, lighting a campfire might raise the
temperature up to mild or warm, which means it is safe to **sleep**
there without catching the flu. If the room is too cold, you have a
chance of catching the **disease** flu while sleeping.

To check the temperature in the room use the command **weather local**.
If it is mild or warmer, you probably won't get the flu. If it is chilly
colder, you've got an increased change of catching the flu. Check out
**help diseases**.

`camp, weather local, rest, sleep`

- Some mobs are scared of fire and will flee at the sight one, instead
  of attacking you.

So it can be a type of defense if you need to rest outside. It will not
stop all mobs from attacking you, but many normal forest animals don't
like open fire.

- You can also get crude torches from a campfire.

Use the command **get torch fire**. They are not very good **light**
sources and do not last very long, but they are free to make. Burned out
torches are useless weight, just drop them.

`camp, get torch fire, hold torch, rem torch, drop torch`

Campfires can even be used to **mend** some gear in the game. If you
have a cross pien hammer, you can **mend** some metal items at a
campfire with varying degrees of success. Some Sinda **elves** are
particularly good at this.

## **Getting Comfortable**

Some rooms in the game already have campfires going in them, or maybe a
fireplace. Those rooms tend to be warmer for sleeping, and you can cook
at most of them.

If you rest or sleep on a bed, pallet, bench, near a fireplace, or next
to a campfire you gain a special affect called -comfortable.

Some beds and fires can even increase this to -very comfortable after a
short duration.

Being -comfortable gives you a small increase to your hits, mana, and
movement regen. A good way to recover from a fight or after a long ride.

It is NOT PROVEN but ASSUMED that -comfortable is a +1 to regens, and
-very comfortable is +2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Campfire Cooking**

One major benefit of campfires is being able to **cook** at one. There
are two different ways to cook at a campfire, **pan** cooking or
**casserole** cooking.

### Pan Cooking

You need to get a **pan** to **cook** this way, they load in some areas
or you can buy a pan from several grocer shops or a bazaar.

You can hold the **pan** or **wear** it on your belt, but they can also
**cook** just from being in your **inventory**. You can cook raw meat or
fish, which makes it smoked meat or fish. Smoked meat lasts longer
before it decays and weights a little bit less.

If you have **salt** in your **inventory**, you can cook smoked and
cured meat. Smoked and cured meat lasts even longer before it decays and
weighs a little bit less. You can find salt in some areas of the game or
purchase it at herbal shops. No special command is needed to cook with
salt, just need it in your inventory.

Cooked meats can also be sold at some grocer shops for small amounts of
coins. It's a slow way to make money, but works!

`butcher corpse, butcher 2.corpse, camp, cook raw, cook fish`

There are even some **herblore**s that need to be cooked in a pan once
they are made as well. Like the Baker or Leafcake herblores.

### Casserole Cooking

If you have a **casserole** you can also use the **boil** command to
make other dishes, stews, and soups. You need to add water or another
liquid to the **casserole** first. You can use water, milk, beer, etc...
You can add meat to a casserole but you do not have too. Any fruits,
vegetables, or mushrooms can be added. You can also add spices, like
salt, pepper, cinnamon, sage, and other herbs.

There are dozens of different recipe combinations you can make with a
casserole! Most of the meals are very filling.

Look at help **boil** command for more information.

`pour water casserole, pour beer casserole, boil casserole, put meat casserole, put carrot casserole, put pepper casserole`

## **Eating and Drinking**

You can drink water from fountains, lakes, ponds, rivers, some swamps,
springs, etc...

You can carry some water with you in a cup, water skin, or other
containers.

`pour water skin, pour water cup, wear skin belt, drink cup, drink skin`

You can eat any food you come across, plums, cheese, even raw meat, and
honeycombs. You don't even need to pick it up first. But you can also
carry the food with you to eat it later.

Some food in the game will decay after a while, it will then disappear
from you inventory or sacks.

Your character can never die from starvation or dehydration.

BUT being hungry or thirsty (or both) greatly reduces you regen of hits,
mana, and moves. If you want to recover fast try to stay full and not
thirsty.

Carrying one container to carry water is a very good idea. As is
carrying food to cover your next meal when you get hungry.

Eat and drink when it is available, and you will have better regen for
hits, moves, and mana.

## **Fishing**

If you are looking for other ways to survive in the wild, you can go
**fishing**. You need a fishing rod or a fishing net. Hold the fishing
rod and type **fish**. For the net, hold the net and use net.

You can go fishing while in a boat on a lake, pond, or river. You can
also fish in many rooms of the game that are near water as well. Just
try fishing in a room to see if it will work.

`hold rod, hold net, fish, use net`

## **Milking**

You can also **milk** cows! Milk can be very nutritious and can fill you
up. It can also be used with some casserole recipes. You need a
container to hold the milk. A pail or skin will work, for example. Then
just find a cow and start milking.

`hold pail, hold skin, milk cow, drink skin`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **BN camp rent**

If you are playing as a **Black Númenórean** campfires can be used like
an **inn** in towns. You can use the command **camp rent** to log out in
many areas of the **map**. They even work for retiring a **Black
Númenórean** character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Some drawbacks of camping**

There are a few drawbacks of camping, but forest fires is not one of
them. You won't burn down any areas of the game with a campfire.

Beware building a campfire in Fangorn Forest... the Ents and Huorns of
the forest do not like fire.

You can use the torches taken from a campfire to **burn** some webs in
the game, however.

If some player runs across a campfire and sees it burning they can look
for **track**s there, and possibly find you if you've walked away from
the campfire. The campfire is a sign that some was was recently in that
room.

There is also a command called "**look around**" that allows any player
to scan the zone around them and look for signs of smoke rising up from
campfires. It's not very direct, but can help you find your way back in
the general direction of a campfire.

You can use the **'cover campfire**' command to help reduce the light it
provides.

So make a campfire today and start practicing some of those survival
skills! It just takes a minute to try most of them out.

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")
 