---
title: Newbie Guide Casting and Spells
tags:
  - Guides
  - Newbie Help
---
**Newbie Guide Casting and Spells**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

"And you?" she said, turning to Sam. "For this is what your folk would
call magic, I believe, though I do not understand clearly what they
mean; and they seem to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy.
But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that
you wished to see Elf-magic?"

Galadriel, JRRT, The Fellowship of the Ring

This guide is all about casting, spells, and mana. It will also cover a
brief description of some lower level spells in the game, that new
characters would have access too.

`I also want to share a disclaimer:  I do no recommend playing a caster as your first character`
`in MUME.  A tanky warrior, defense warrior, bash/damage warrior, scout, thief, archer, or `
`warrior/scout combo are all much easier to learn the game with.  Please play a caster, but`
`not when you are first learning the game.  Casters are pretty low powered at lower levels.`

Many parts of this guide reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at:

<https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**cast**.

# Mana

Your **mana** represents the pool of potential raw magical power your
character can bring forth. If you have a larger mana pool (around 120+
mana) you can cast more spells or stronger spells then someone with a
smaller mana pool (like around 50 mana).

- Your max **mana** pool can also be affected by your abilities, mainly
  **Intelligence**, **Wisdom**, and to a lesser extent **Willpower**.

<!-- -->

- Your **age** also has an effect on your max mana pool. See **help
  age** for more information.

<!-- -->

- Being drunk can lower your mana pool... until you sober up.

<!-- -->

- Some serious **wound**s to the head can lower your mental abilities,
  like Intelligence, and will also lower your mana pool.

<!-- -->

- A few rare items in the game can provide bonus mana. Items that give
  the bonus as long as you hold or wear them.

<!-- -->

- Some items give small boosts to mana are potions or herblores that are
  temporary.

Several of these items reduce your mana pool for a small amount of time
after you use them.

Several playable races in the game have no mana. **Trolls**,
**Beornings** metamorphed as **Bears**, and **Zaugurz** Orcs, have no
mana pool at all.

## Mana Use

As you use up your mana, you will notice a **prompt** that gives you a
hint of your mana condition. From full mana to no mana here are the
descriptors and a rough percentage of mana you have left:

Full mana (no prompt message), Burning, Hot, Warm, Cold, Icy, or Frozen

0% or negative mana: Frozen 1 - 10%: Icy 11 - 25%: Cold 26 - 45%: Warm
46 - 70%: Hot 71 - 99%: Burning 100%: Full mana no prompt message

Generally as a caster, it is a good idea to make sure your mana stays at
'burning'. That means you are very often using your mana. If your mana
is always icy, you are using it up to the point where you can't cast. Or
if your mana is always full, that means you aren't using it at all.
Burning mana means you've always got some to use, and you've been using
it.

## Mana Regen

This is how your mana fills back to full. Mana regen is affect by many
factors.

- If you are thirsty or **hungry** your mana regen will be greatly
  reduced.

<!-- -->

- If you are **rest**ing or **sleep**ing your mana will regen faster.

<!-- -->

- Resting or sleeping next to campfire, fireplace, or in a bed can help
  you regen even faster. It will say -comfortable under Affected By.

Careful not to get the flu while sleeping in the cold!! Try a
**campfire** or wear a scarf, blanket, wool gloves, or other warm gear.
If you are resting or sleeping on a bed, bench, or other nice spot you
can be comfortable and regen slightly faster. If you are resting or
sleeping next to a fireplace or campfire you regen slightly faster.

- Some **disease**s in the game can lower your mana regen slightly.

<!-- -->

- **Wound**s to your head can slightly reduce your mana regen by
  lowering your mental abilities.

<!-- -->

- Some **poison**s, like psylonia, will reduce your mana regen greatly.

<!-- -->

- Your mana regen is affected by what **age** your character is.

Generally younger characters regen mana more slowly then older
characters. See **help age** for more information.

- Some **races** regen mana better then other races.

<!-- -->

- Your **abilities** can affect mana regen. Over all having a higher
  Willpower will help.

<!-- -->

- Some magical items in the game can help with mana regen, like
  embedding certain gems in a legend staff or wearing some magical
  jewelry.

<!-- -->

- Being drunk on **alcohol** can reduce mana and mana regen.

<!-- -->

- Infusion, potions, flasks, and **herblore**s can give a small boost to
  mana regen, but some later come with a small penalty to mana regen.

<!-- -->

- If you make a **casserole** dish using a magic mushroom as an
  ingredient, you can make a stew that recovers a very small amount of
  mana.

### Smoking Pipeweed

- Sometimes smoking pipeweed can help recover mana. You must have a pipe
  with pipeweed in it.

**Hold** pipe, **REST** FIRST, then **smoke** pipe. You might recover
some mana and get a small bonus to mana regen for a couple of minutes.

`rem shield, get pipe pack, put weed pipe, hold pipe, rest, smoke pipe, rem pipe, stand, wear shield`

### Infusion:

The most common "potion" in MUME. It loads in several areas near and in
the Shire. It will cure the flu if you drink it and also removes ALL
potion and herblore effects on you. So if you have an herblore up you
want to keep, do not drink this potion.

- It also provides a small and short boost to **mana** and mana regen.
  It's nice for like one extra **cure light** spell.

The infusion will decay after like 24 minutes to 45 minutes or so.

## Mana Damage

Very few things it the game can actually do mana damage to you. There is
a gem you can embed in a legend staff that can do mana damage. The orc
**shaman** spell black breath can do mana damage. And the scary
**poison**, psylonia (mostly from fungus mobs) can do mana damage.

Mana damage might also come from smoking pipeweed (randomly can do small
mana damage) or backfiring a spell when casting it.

## How to Learn Spells

You must have pracs to spend, and visit a casting guild: cleric or mage.
Type prac to see what **spells** you can **practice** at your level.
When you type prac in the guild, you will see the difficulty of
practicing the spell. If it says 'very easy' or 'easy' it does not take
very many pracs to make it castable. If it says 'hard' or 'very hard' it
takes way more practices spent to make it castable.

If a spell is higher level then you are, you will NOT see it on your
list of spells to practice. As you level up, you will see more and more
spells show up on the practice list.

If you type practice outside of a guild, you will get a list of all the
spells (and other skills) you know. You will also see how much mana they
cost to cast. The default is for normal spell casting effort (you'll see
more down the page). You will also see the spell casting speed. As you
level up the amount of mana spells cost will go down slightly and the
spells will get slightly faster.

Also some casting **guilds** in the game are very limited, or somewhat
limited, on what **spells** they even offer to teach. You might be the
right level, but you cannot even see that spell at that guild because
they do not teach it. You need to travel far and wide to find a guild
that teaches the spell you want. Or a similar problem the guild you are
checking out only offers that spell to 1-3 pracs, which is often not
enough.

There are 2 special spells, which are really more like a ritual, that
anyone can perform if they meet the requirements:

- **Create focus** - allows higher levels free peoples to make powerful
  magical item called a focus
- **Corrupt** - allows Sauron's minions to twist and corrupt magical
  items for use by evil

## Casting Is Not Just for Casters

There are some players that do not want their character to learn any
spells for very viable role-play reasons. But, a majority of playable
characters have mana, you might as well use it. There are a few spells
that are popular even among warriors for example. Some players make
combo characters that can cast somewhat decently, while being able to
try and perform other tasks as well. Some characters only learn 1 or 2
spells with good utility for them. A little bit of magic can go a long
ways.

Here is a quick list of some spells that even many non-casters learn,
because, well, magic is useful and handy. These spells tend to be lower
level, so you backfire less when using them and they do not take many
pracs to make them playable or usable. Some of these useful spells for
non-casters can be mimicked by some magical items or herblores in the
game.

**cure light** - fast hit points even for scouts and warriors, can
reduce some regen time

**cure blindness** - even some PKing warriors learn this

**create food/water** - eat and drink anywhere for anyone, and carry
around less weight

**bless** - most common buff spell in the game

**remove poison** - helps remove one of the most common debuff
conditions in the game

**detect magic** - seeing magic auras and magic items

**shroud** - walk past annoying aggressive mobs

## How to Cast a Spell

The best way to learn to **cast** a spell is to read several spell help
files. Like **help bless**, help cure light, **help burning hands**,
etc... In many cases you can even copy and past the command you need to
type out to cast it. Several spells can be **cast** on your self as a
default, like if you cast cure light, it will automatically target YOU.
But you can also cast several of these spells on other characters or
even sometimes mobs or items. Many spells require a target to cast them
on, and a few spells can be cast on items.

All spells require you to have enough mana to cast them, if you don't
you will get a message saying you don't have enough mana flowing through
you. Also almost all spells require you to be standing to cast them, but
most can be cast while riding as well. Some spells can even be cast
while you are in a fight. But be WARNED, your casting speed is greatly
increased if you are in combat. You will notice your spells take much
longer to cast if engaged with an enemy. Also you spells can be
interrupted if you are hit in combat. If you are casting and wish you
could stop, just hit enter to cancel the casting attempt.

You can set an **alias** to cast a spell, for example you can use cw to
cast create water. Using the **alias** command like this:

`al cw cast 'create water'`

Then you can do this so you can create water on yourself, in a water
skin, or on another character.

`cw, cw skin, cw `<character name>

## Spell Help Files

Syntax : What to type to make the spell work properly. Accumulative: If
the spell is accumulative or not. Duration : If the spell has a duration
or not. Position : In what positions you can cast the spell. Example :
An example that should work if you just cut/paste it.

Here is an example of the spell help file for cure light

Syntax : cast 'cure light' \<victim\> Type : Healing Accumulative: N/A
Duration : No Casting : Normal Position : Standing, fighting Level :
Level 1 Class : Cleric Min. Mana : 10

So the lowest amount of mana cost you can ever get that spell down to is
10. But if you are low level, or a non-caster, or do not have many pracs
in it, it can easily cost MORE then 10 mana to cast that spell.

## Backfires

When you are lower level OR do not have a spell practiced up to a very
high percentage OR it is a hard or very hard spell to learn in the
guild, you have a chance of backfiring the spell when you try and cast
it. **Backfire**s have varying degrees of severity. A weak **backfire**
mostly just means the spell didn't work and you wasted the mana to cast
it. Backfires can become more serious, including doing hit point, mana,
and movement point damage. Even backfiring your mana pool down to
negative numbers!

There are 4 ways to help avoid backfires:

- You can gain more levels. The higher level you are the lower the
  chance of a **backfire** when casting spells.

<!-- -->

- You can practice that particular spell more at the guild. Getting a
  higher percent helps to reduce the chance of a backfire.

<!-- -->

- You can change your spell casting effort. Taking longer to cast your
  spells can reduce the backfire chance (see spell casting effort).

<!-- -->

- You can try casting the spell in a "good zone". Zones have alignments
  and if you are good casting in a good zone, your chance to backfire is
  lower.

Try out Grey Havens, Lorien, or Rivendell to notice this effect the
most.

Many players try to squeeze in just enough pracs so that they only
backfire a spell like 5% of the time or less. This works very well over
all with out of combat spells, where when you backfire, you can just
wait for some more mana to regen. This risky sounding practice does
leave you a prac or 2 to spend elsewhere.

## Spell Casting Speed

Spell casting speed is listed in your practice list of skills. At lower
levels you will cast slower then at higher levels.

Armour Poor Hard Magic User 31 Very short Detect magic Bad Easy Magic
User 5 Very short Shroud Poor Hard Magic User 6 Short Bless Poor Normal
Cleric 6 Short Create food Bad Normal Cleric 6 Short Create water Bad
Normal Cleric 6 Very short Cure light Poor Easy Cleric 10 Very short

Several things can help you increase your spell casting speed:

- You can gain more levels. The higher level you are the faster your
  casting speed is.

<!-- -->

- You can practice that particular spell more at a guild. Getting a
  higher percent helps reduce casting time.

<!-- -->

- Casting OUT OF COMBAT is MUCH FASTER then casting in combat. Try to
  cast out of combat as much as you can for fast casting.

<!-- -->

- A legend focus staff increases casting speed when held.

## Minimum Mana

In your practice list of skills, you will also see the mana cost for
spells. These mana costs start out HIGH when you are low level, and will
drop over time. They can eventually get as low as the amount of mana
listed in the **help** file for that **spell** or on the **help spell
list**.

The best way to reduce mana cost for spells is to level up or to
practice a spell higher.

Legend focus staves and focus helmet can both lower mana costs for
spells when worn.

## Spell Duration

The only reliable way to learn what your spells durations are is to cast
them and time it. It does not show up on any lists or timers in the
game. Some spells have shorter durations, while others can last a long
time.

The best way to increase your spells durations is to level up or
practice a spell higher.

Good examples of short duration is bless and blindness, they only last a
few minutes.

Good examples of long duration is detect magic, armour, and protection
from evil. They can easily last over 24 minutes.

Many spells have no duration, and happen instantly. Like casting burning
hands at a target or cure light at a target.

Also a few spells have a max duration or a cap duration, where you
cannot get the spell to last any longer.

## Spell Casting Effort

In MUME you can change how much effort you want to put into your spells
success. If you want to cast a spell faster you can, but you'll pay with
higher mana cost or chance of backfire. The default casting effort for
all characters in the game is "normal". That is a balance of mana cost,
speed of casting, and chance of success. If you want to increase the
speed you can, or increase the chance of less backfires, you can.

You can think of changing your spell casting effort to be VERY SIMILAR
to changing your mood from wimpy to aggressive. But most spells are cast
at "normal".

You can change spellcasting to change ALL the spells you cast. Or you
can type the command in each time you cast the spell. Some players even
set aliases to cast a spell at different efforts. Like one alias for
normal lightning bolts, and a different alias for quick lightning bolts.

If you change your spell casting effort, it will change the mana cost
and the casting times when you type practice. That way you can see how
much spells will cost you and how fast they will be if you choose to
cast them differently then 'normal'.

So as a lower level caster, you can reduce your backfires by casting
careful or thorough. It is very easy to play around with this in game,
and you can always change it back after you have tried it out.

The spell effort progresses like this, also please read help cast for
more information:

Effort Effect quick - casting time, + mana used, - spell power, +
backfire fast normal minimize mana usage; average casting time, power,
backfire careful thorough + casting time, + mana used, + spell power, -
backfire

`change spellcasting normal, change spellcasting quick, change spellcasting`

## Low Level Casters

Playing as a low level caster, and trying to cast can lead to alot of
frustration. Your spells will cost ALOT of mana. That will improve as
you level up or practice spells. The mana cost will go down over time.
But as a lower level caster, you will need to deal with high mana
casting. Also at lower level, the chance for backfires is MUCH higher
then for higher level casters. Just be prepared to backfire alot, and be
almost out of mana often.

This is one reason several players of the game do not even really cast
spells or practice them much at lower levels. Some instead play as maybe
an archer for the first 7 levels, then transition over to a caster, for
example. You can always decay some skills to learn more spells later.

## Newbie Spells by Guild

Following is a list of spells in each of the casters guilds by
increasing level. It will also have the potential minimum mana cost for
that spell. Then a short description of what they do.

Please refer to **help spell list** and help **<spell name>** for these
as well.

Such as help cure light, help bless, help shroud, help detect evil,
etc...

## Low Level Mage spells:

##### Level 1

**Magic Missile** (3) - Low level attack spell, very cheap and very fast
to cast. Does about 3-5 damage. It can also interrupt a character or mob
trying to cast a spell at you. So not very good for damage, but useful
at lower levels vs rabbits and birds.

**Ventriloquate** (5) - A cute spell based off of Gandalf making Bill,
Bert, and Tom talk to each other until the sun came up in The Hobbit.
Fun at parties or to play with. Do not put many pracs here.

##### Level 2

**Detect Invisibility** (5) - Allows you to see characters with the
shroud spell up for a duration of time. All characters eventually see
through shroud anyways at higher levels, but you might want it for lower
levels and decay it later.

**Detect Magic** (5) - A very handy spell that lets you see if items are
magical, or have been enchanted. You can also detect if spells have
recent been cast in they room by seeing an magical aura they leave
behind. You can even tell if it was cast by good or evil characters.

Ñoldor elves have a natural sensitivity to magic, and have a natural
passive ability like the Detect Magic spell.

There are some rare amulets that can give you the Detect Magic spell as
well.

##### Level 3

**Armour** (30) - This spell creates a defensive bubble or layer of
armour around you. It has 2 functions. It can act as an extra "hit point
shield" eatting up some of the hit point damage that should be reducing
your hit points. Also can reduce some of the damage you would be taking.
A very good defensive spell. Basically ALL casters learn this and even
some combo characters.

**Chill Touch** (5) Low level attack spell, does around 5-10 damage. The
other feature is broken, don't practice this.

##### Level 4

**Create Light** (5) - This spell "recharges" a light source so you can
re-light it and use it again. It can reset a torch, a candle, or fill a
lantern with "magical oil" for example. That way you can burn the light
source over again. Some casters learn it at lower levels, and decay it
later at higher levels.

**Locate Magic** (20) - An awkward spell to use to see the use of magic
in an area around you. Most players use other detection spells instead.

##### Level 5

**Burning Hands** (7) - This mid-low level damage spell does around
16-20 damage. It is a fire based spell which means it does a small bit
of extra damage vs wood targets (roots, vines, trees, etc). It also is
very useful for burning some webs in the game, or melting icy doors. A
very common mage spell.

**Shroud** (5) - This defensive spell prevents low level mobs and
players from seeing you. The detect invisibility spell will allow you to
see through it. Also mobs and players that are higher level will see
through it (for example rattlesnakes see Shroud). When active it
provides +10% DB... but only for the first attack or two. The spell
drops VERY QUICKLY after you entern combat. If you practice it low it
only lasts for one hit, but more pracs or higher level casters might see
it last a bit longer in combat before it drops. A very common spell that
most casters get, and even some other classes or combos.

The Shadows herblore can cast low level Shroud on you once, when you
first drink it.

##### Level 6

**Find the Path** (20) - Basically an outdated spell, do not bother
practicing it.

**Locate** (20) - This spell will give you a magical "key word" for
teleport and other spells, such as scry, watch room, or maybe portal. By
itself, it doesn't really do anything until you use it with those higher
level spells.

##### Level 7

**Call Familiar** (15) - This useful spell creates a random, weak, low
level mob under your control. Examples are maybe a rat, snake, fox,
crow, toad, or other creatures. The familiar summoned acts like a
charmed animal. It will assist you in a fight, providing parry split.
But they make VERY poor tanks. Also some of them have low moves. You can
dismiss your familiar at any time with the command 'tell familiar
leave', making it the only dismissable spell in the game. You can even
look through your familiars eyes and have it move around neighboring
rooms as a poor version of a scout. (beware this does NOT work in some
rooms of the game, or some no-port rooms). A very fun low level spell to
play around with.

**Night Vision** (25) - This duration spell allows you to see mobs in
dark rooms while it is active. You can also see in light fog, and even
defend yourself in heavy fog. You can't see everything in the dark, just
mobs or being attacked. It is not as good as the dark vision provided by
orcs or trolls.

Having the awareness skill practiced to 95% gives you the night vision
effect.

Drinking the Seeing herblore will also give you Night Vision.

**Shocking Grasp** (9) - This mid-low level damage spell does around
20-30 damage. It is a lightning based spell.

## Low Level Cleric Spells:

##### Level 1

**Cure Light** (10) - Low level cure spell, recovers around 7-12 hit
points, depending on how good of a caster you are.

**Detect Evil** (5) - A duration spell that lets you see if characters
or mobs are evil. They will glow with a (red aura). It does not tell you
HOW evil they are, so anything from slightly evil to max evil will glow
the same way. Can be helpful at lower levels trying to figure out how to
get your alignment up or keep it up. Or what mobs might be ok to attack
or not.

Dúnedain men have a natural sensitivity to evil, and have a natural
passive ability like the Detect Evil spell.

##### Level 2

**Create Water** (5) - This spell makes a volume of water, that
increases as you gain levels or practice it more. You can cast it
directly on a character to give them a "drink", or cast it on say a
water skin to fill it up. Very handy spell. Some characters us it to
avoid the 4-5 lbs of water skin to carry around as well.

**Detect Poison** (5) - This spell lets you know if something is
poisoned or poisonous. Honestly don't bother. Just gain a few more
levels and get remove poison instead.

##### Level 3

**Create Food** (5) - This spell makes a magic mushroom that's food. You
can feed yourself or anyone in you group. Saves the weight of carrying
around food too. The mushrooms get more filling as you level up or get
more pracs.

The herblore version of this spell is the Baker herblore from the
Shire's lonely giant quest.

**Smother** (5) - Low level attack spell. It does not affect targets
that do not breath. So it won't work on most undead or plants. It does
around 8-12 damage and has a chance to give the target a debuff of -2%
OB and -2% DB if it fails the save.

##### Level 4

**Cure Blindness** (5) - This spell removes the -blindness flag on
yourself or another character.

**Protection from Evil** (20) - This defensive spell lasts for a
duration of time. During that time evil mobs trying to attack you swing
slower for their first hit. They get a delay in trying to start a fight
with you. Maybe giving you a chance to walk by, get out, or cast a spell
at them. The more evil the mob, the better this delay works. It has no
effect vs players or neutral mobs.

Legend foci items called a phial can give you a permanent protection
from evil spell effect.

##### Level 5

**Bless** (5) - This spell is somewhat short in duration, but helps you
slightly resist spells targeting you and grants +5% OB on aggressive or
+3% OB and +2% PB on wimpy. It's the most common 'buff' spell in the
game. Works great in groups.

A gem you can embed in a legend staff can cast a group bless spell.

A crystal phial legend focus item can also cast bless or a group bless
spell.

A magical quartzite ring can also cast bless about 20 times.

**Cure Serious** (15) - This cure spell is used by many casters and is
more mana efficient then using cure light. It can recover 12-28 damage,
depending on how good of a caster you are.

##### Level 6

**Blindness** (10) - This spell has a chance to blind the target if they
fail the save. If they make their save, it has no effect. When blind a
target is at -20% OB and -20% DB, making it one of the best debuff
spells in the game. Blind targets also cannot attack you, because they
cannot see you. The duration is fairly short, maxing out at around 2
minutes, so you better act FAST.

**Cure Disease** (15) - This spell helps you or another character get
rid of a disease. It works against all diseases in the game. Sometimes
the target might need the spell cast on them more then once to fully
cure them.

The herblore Leafcake can also cure flu as can infusions. Other diseases
you can recover from, and gain a small bonus to resist them later.

##### Level 7

**Sense Life** (5) - This spell helps you to notice any sneaking or
hiding characters or mobs in the room. It is also supposed to help you
see if mobs are stealing from you or lining up a backstab. It is NOT
100% see anything hidden, but helps your chances. Good for spotting
pesky moles, sneaking snakes, etc...

**Strength** (20) - This duration spell starts out by giving a +1 bonus
to Strength for you or another character. As you level up or put more
pracs in, the spell will last longer. Eventually it will grant a +2
bonus. High level casters that focus on it sometimes can grant a +3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")
 