---
title: Newbie Guide Mounts, Riding, and Pets
---

**Newbie Guide Mounts, Riding, and Pets**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

The goal of this guide is to help newer players to use mounts and pets.

Many parts of this guide reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at:

<https://mume.org/help/help_index>

Bold words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help **ride**.

Exploring in MUME can be done on foot, but you can get much farther,
faster if you are using a **mount**. Your **movement points** only go so
far before you run low and get tired, slow, or weak. Riding a mount is
one of the best ways to make your moves last much longer and travel
farther.

How to Ride

All you really need is a **mount** and some **Ride** skill. The higher
your **Ride** skill is the more efficiently you use your mount and fall
off much less. The closer you can ride your mount down toward zero
moves, or push it to low moves. And the less you get thrown off your
mount. Falling off a mount does some minor damage (4-10ish hits) but if
you are awful hits with bleeding wounds, falling off a mount could be
fatal.

At lower levels (1-4) you can probably get by with 40%-50% Ride skill
easily. But as you progress with the game, you'll want higher ride
skill, maybe 70%. If you are riding away from **PKilling** or hunting
down someone you'll need higher ride 85%-100%.

Where to get Mounts

Many **mounts** load for free in many areas of the game. Learning a few
good mount load spots of often the first part of map knowledge many new
players learn. You can also always 'upgrade' a mount while you are
playing. Say you found a pony, use it until you come across a mountain
mule or a pack horse. A pony is better then nothing. Check for mounts at
some of the many farms in the game. Also some camps, stables, corrals,
and other areas are good for mounts.

If you are using **mappers**, look for letters on the **map** like: M
(mules) P (ponies) W (wargs or wolves) H (usually pack horses)

Types of Mounts and Riders

First we'll go over the types of **mounts** in the game and who
primarily uses them. I will be listing them from the least useful to the
most useful for each category of races that can use them: Having less
moves, less move **regen**, and lower **Strength** is what makes a mount
less useful. Having more moves, more move **regen**, or higher
**Strength** is what makes a mount more useful. Some mounts are just
better at getting around then others. **Trolls**, **Zaugurz orcs**, and
**Bears** cannot ride at all. Actually trolls often just eat the mounts
corpse.

**Hobbits** and **dwarves** are shorter and can ride donkeys, ponies,
mountain mules, and dales ponies. They can attempt to ride taller
mounts, but will fall off FREQUENTLY, and get hurt.

The dales ponies require you to be a **hobbit** or a **dwarf** and have
a **citizenship** in the Shire. You can **buy** them at the pet store up
by Dwaling in the north east corner of the Shire. Save up, dales ponies
cost 10 gold each!

All **elves** (including **half elves**) and **Men** (including **Black
Númenóreans**) can ride all the mounts that the shorter races can ride.
They can also ride docile horse, pack horse, trained horse, warhorse,
and horse of the Rohirrim. Docile horses will wander on you, so they are
kind of frustrating to use. Save up, warhorses cost 6 gold!

Horse of the Rohirrim are only accessible by doing a **quest** or saving
one from a Dunland chieftain that has captured one.

**Rohirrim** subrace of men get some bonuses to riding. Allegedly, elves
don't need a saddle to ride, gaining the benefits of saddle while
bareback riding. **Tarkhnarb orcs** and **Morruhk orcs** can ride brown
wolves and hungry wargs. In addition Morruhk can unlock a special warg
just for themselves called a slavering warg in the game.

Black Númenóreans also can get access to a special dark steed from Dol
Guldur, kind of like the Nine Black Riders had in LoTR books.

Riding Mounts

Expect your moves to last like 50%-75% more efficnetly. Expect to run
into alot of rooms you cannot enter while you are riding. Buildings,
some water rooms, dense forests, caves, areas with very broken ground,
etc... are NO-RIDE rooms. You'll need to lead your mount to enter those
rooms.

Also all horse like mounts in the game cannot climb or swim. So if you
are going through exits that require climb and swim expect to leave your
mount behind.

Some options with riding mounts is if you don't have one, but someone
else in your group does have a mount, you can ride behind them. That
means 2 players on the same mount. It does use up the mounts moves
somewhat faster, but is an option if you don't have enough mounts for
your group.

Also, if you are getting some spam when using your mount, you can change
spam mount to reduce the messages on the screen.

Mount Gear

There is really one mount gear item in the game. A saddle or a
saddlecloth. There is exactly no different between the 2 items. They are
exactly the same with different names.

The main beneift of using a saddle is your mount is immune to the summon
and transfer spells. Those are rare cleric spells that can magically
teleport your mount away from you. So if you are worried about your
mount being magically pulled away, saddle it. Saddles can be found in a
few spots in the game for free. Or often purchased from some of the
general or travel shops in the game. Saddles can also hold a few items,
but less then what a backpack can do. Not a bad place to put a spare
water skin or flask of oil.

Saddles allegedly allow you to ride a mount a bit more efficiently,
slightly lowering the amount of moves you use while riding. Similar to
boots while walking. But I'll be honest I've never really noticed the
benefit much. I do saddle my rare or expensive mounts to make sure they
will not be summoned from me.

Riding whips do nothing, they are simply a cosmetic item, or cheap loot
to sell.

Mount commands

Ride and Lead are the main mount commands. But others are useful to
know.

Ride simply lets you ride a mount. Ride behind lets you ride 2 players
on a mount.

Lead keeps your mount with you while you are walking around. Becareful
fleeing, you will leave your mount behind and will need to find it
again. If you see everyone in your group leading or they opened a door
PLEASE lead your mount too. Or you will get left behind as they enter a
door you cannot fit through.

Abandon mount is a way to leave your mount in a specific room, hopefully
to come back to it later. You can abandon mount while leading.

Dismount is another option that is similar to abandon. You will no
longer be riding and you will leave your mount behind.

Saddle mount will let you put a saddle or saddlecloth on your mount.

Unsaddle mount will let you take a saddle back off of a mount.

Label is a VERY useful command to use with mounts. Every pack horse
looks the same. You can very easily get your pack horse confused for
someone else's pack horse. The best way for you to keep mounts straight
is to label your own mount. That way you know which mount is yours or
can even find it easier if you lose it, like after fleeing around.

If you examine your mount, you can see if it has a saddle and what is in
its inventory. If your Ride skill is high enough, you can also see an
estimate of your mounts movement points. Like if the mount is tired,
slow, or weak in moves.

Warhorses and slavering wargs have a special command to call the mounts
to you! If you are seperated, and still near by your mount, they can
come when you call them. Try tell warhorse come here, or tell slavering
come here.

Mounts as Loot Assist

Your mount can also substantially help with carrying items that you've
looted. Most mounts have pretty high moves, move regen, and Strength. To
have your mount help with looting, give items to your mount. Such as:

give sword mount, give all.shield mount, give all.axe mount, give
all.chain mount

Your mount has an inventory that can get filled up the same as your
character does. If you want your mount to carry even MORE weight, put
items in a large sack, then give the full sack to your mount. It is
possible to give a mount enough weight it will eventually get tired, but
they can carry more then most characters, farther.

Then to get your loot back from your mount's inventory use the unsaddle
command. Just typing unsaddle mount will take the saddle off of their
back. If you want to get the items from their inventory type the
command:

unsaddle mount sword, unsaddle mount all.sword, unsaddle mount sack

If you master this mount looting trick, your rate of earning gold and
silver will increase.

Stables

Stables function much like an Inn where you rent your character. But
instead of your character, you rent your mount there. The only item
mounts can rent with is a saddle. Any other items on your mount will be
handed to you as you rent it. You will also get a ticket from a stable
master. The ticket is how you get your mount back out if it's "rent".

When you return to ANY stable master later, you just type trade ticket.
And your mount will instantly appear. Getting a mount out of rent from a
ticket costs a some silver, depending on what type of mount you rented,
and which stable you are at. Most cities have stables. If you lose your
ticket, you are out of luck getting that mount back, and will have to
get a new mount somehow.

Pet Shops

You can purchase a mount from a pet shop. Pet shops are located in most
cities in the game. You cannot sell ANY items at a pet shop, they are
only there for selling pets and mounts. Some mounts, like warhorses or
dales ponies, can ONLY be gotten at a pet shop. Other mounts can be
found or purchased at a pet shop.

You can also name your mount or pets at a pet shop. Instead of buy pony,
use the command buy pony Bill. When anyone examines your mount, it will
also say it's name. You can do this for any pets.

Pets

The only way to obtain a pet is by purchasing from a pet shop. Some pets
are fairly cheap, others cost several gold. Generally the lower "level"
the pet is, the cheaper it is. All mobs in the game, including mounts
and pets, have a level. Most of the pets are low level, like 1 to 4. You
can just get a pet for fun, or to have it help in combat.

Pets do NOT make good tanks, they are probably lvl 1-4. So they die in a
few hits, or flee from combat. But pets can assist you! Some pets have
poor moves, and can't go very far. Other pets can travel a few zones
before they might need to rest.

If you do use a pet, I recommend using the Label command on it, like
with mounts to help keep track it. Also, becareful not to hit your pet
in combat. If you hit your pet, it will hate you and not follow your
orders anymore. Like don't type kill bird and accidentally hit your
falcon.

Some of the pets you can get are rather weak, and won't help much. If
you are really just looking for a somewhat effective combat assistant, I
recommend getting a falcon or two. Falcons fly, can fly over surface
water, and fly up climb exits. So they can keep up with you in most
areas of the game. Also they have very impressive moves and can fly for
many many zones. They do auto flee when hit, so they cannot tank for
you. I have used falcons with several of my characters to help them
level up.

Pigeons are a pet that offer a delivery service. You can buy a pigeon, a
pen, and a quill and have the pigeon fly and deliver a note or letter
for you. They might even be able to deliver some other very very small
and light objects as well, or some coins. There is a small chance the
pigeon will get lost and not deliver if it's sent to someone in a
dangerous or hard to get to area.

Command Skill

In order to order your pets around, like to dance or assist you in
combat, you must use the command skill and the order command. To order
one low level pet, you can probably get by less then 50% Command skill.
Two pets will require at least 50%+ command, and higher if you get more
pets. If you are having issues ordering your pets around, probably need
to put a couple of more pracs in command skill.

You MUST group your pets for them to follow your commands. If they are
not grouped with you, they will not follow any of your orders. Also if
you want them to help you in combat, you need to group with them incase
one of your pets kills the mob with a hit. Otherwise you will not get
any of the kill xp. If you order your pet to do illegal actions in a
town, you will be arrested because you told them to do it.

To use the command skill type order followers, or order that specific
pet:

order followers assist, order cat dance, order falcon rest

Call Familiar

This is a level 7 mage spell that magically summons a pet to help you.
These pet familiars that show up are very easy to command, and want to
listen to your orders. They disappear at the end of the duration of the
spell, but the duration gets longer and longer as you level up. They can
be a nice assist mob if you are a low or mid level mage. Another bonus
is they are free! Just costs some mana.

They are also the only pet in the game that you can command out of your
own room. So you can use a familiar you have summoned to scout in rooms
ahead. It's a very fun and interesting spell, and if you are a low level
caster, I recommend playing around with it. If you end up not liking or
need the spell, you can always decay it later. Don't forget to group
your familiar!

Leadership Skill

If you get a group larger then 3 that you are leading around, you will
start to experience what we call "movement delay". Leading around larger
groups slows you down in the game. Which means it takes longer to move
from room to room. If you have a mount, and two pets, and a group
member, and their mount, all following you... that's a big group! Your
group will suffer from "movement delay". It's also a large group with
alot of noise. You will be making noise that can be heard from several
rooms away.

To reduce group noise and group movement delay, you need to use the
Leadership skill. Leading a small group around might need 30% leadership
to remove the delay. Leading larger groups will require higher % in the
Leadership skill. I've had a mage with 3 falcons, my mount, and my
familiar and had some movement delay with that large group. Some pracs
in leadership took care of it, removing my movement delay.

If you later decide you don't like using pets, you can always decay the
Command skill and Leadership skill and get your practices back to spend
on other skills or spells.

Charm and Charmies

Charm is a higher level spell, and I won't go into great detail here
about it. But if you are a caster character, you might want to charm at
later levels. A GREAT way to practice to see if you like the Charm spell
is to use Pets from a pet shop OR get the call familiar spell. They all
use the Command skill and the order command.

Also, do not bring aggressive charmies in to a town. They will very
likely attack a mob and they you will lose your citizenship and get you
arrested for the attack. Mounts and pets from pet shops won't do this,
unless you command them to attack a citizen in town.

Draw Backs of Mounts and Pets

Here is a list of some issues that might arise while leading a pet,
mount, or charmie around.

You can lose them. Either by fleeing away from them, losing them in a
randoms area of the map that can force followers in groups to break up,
or falling off a broken bridge with them. Some bridges in the game can
only handle so much weight before they break and give away.

Rattlesnakes are a mob that is the bane of mounts. If you enter a room
while riding a mount with a rattlesnake, it will autoattack your mount,
and if you don't react, might kill it. Rattlesnakes also have some of
the strongest venom or poison in the game, and the poison can end up
killing your mount if it is bit.

You can also be tracked while riding your mount, but the tracker will
need to follow your mounts tracks.

Sneaking with a mount following you makes you... well.... much less
sneaky. Other players will quickly notice your mount moving around and
assume there could be a sneaking player with it. Removing most of the
advantage of you sneaking in the first place. Most mobs really won't
notice this.

Also be careful using the earthquake spell with your mount. 100's of
horses have died in this game because of the earthquake spell!