---
title: Newbie Guide Accessing Game Information
tags: ["Guides", "Newbie Help"]
---
**Newbie Guide Accessing Game Information**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

"I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly to Gondor. In former days the
members of my order had been well received there.... Less welcome did
the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and grudgingly he permitted
me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books."

Gandalf, JRRT, The Fellowship of the Ring

This guide is accessing information about your character and the game in
MUME.

Many parts of this guild reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**information**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A text based game is heavily based on what information you can read that
the game provides. This guide is a collection of commands that give you
access to information about your character, your gear, your room, your
zone, and the whole game! Some of the information can also be found on
the games website, or from the account menu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Account Menu**

There is some game information you can get access too without logging in
as a character. This is done from the account menu when you log in for
your MUME account. You can get a list of all of your characters with
some quick information about them. And also type info <character> or
prac <character> for some character specific information. Time in game
can be found here too; important for some races.

`time, list, info, practice, help, menu`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Information About the Game**

This section is about reading information related to the entire game.
For all players on all sides of the war. Some of this information is
done on a global scale. It gives access for all of Arda in Middle Earth.

Help Files: You can access the helpfiles in game or by using the link
above. There are dozens and dozens of help files to assist you with many
features and commands of the game. Just type **help**
<what you want to know about>.

Hints: **Hints** is a command that displays fast, specific, mini-help
files that are quick and easy to read. They randomly display, so if you
want to see some different ones, just type **hints** more!

News: Whenever a **news** update about the game is made or implemented,
there is a News Post about it on the News Board. You can read this from
anywhere in the game at any time. Some times one news post contains
multiple changes or updates that have happened over the past few weeks,
summarized. Try **news next** to read any news posts you've been
missing. This information can also be found on the MUME.org website.

**View War**: This gives a brief update about how the battles have been
going between the Free Peoples and the Dark Forces of Sauron. It's a
good way to know if any action has been happening in the war lately.
This information can be found on the MUME.org website. Also p(Nazgum)
has added a channel for this info on the MUME discord.

\*\*\* War status \*\*\* The armies of the West prevail over the forces
of the Dark Lord. Fighting has been limited to a few skirmishes. A few
soldiers of the Dark Lord were boldly slain, latest kill being 4 days
ago. A few soldiers of the West were boldly slain, latest kill being 17
days ago.

**View Warlord**: This gives a list of the top 10 players of Forces of
the Dark Lord and the Armies of the West. You can also type **view
warshared** for a combined list.

**Weather Global**: This gives information about **weather** all across
MUME. Might help to know where it's snowing as that can really effect
your moves. Also **fog** can be an issue so **weather global fog** let
you know how far you need to move to get out of fog.

**Weather Darkness Global**: Sauron's Darkness can spread for MANY zone
sometimes. It can spread as far north as Ingrove, down to near Fangorn,
even as far west as Troll Warrens or Rivendell.

**Time**: This command lets you know what **time** it is in game. You
can type **help month** to also get an idea of what the weather might be
like, or how much daylight or night time you've got to deal with. Some
races need to keep track of the sun, as it affects them negatively.

According to the Sindarin calendar, it is: Oranor, the 4th of Narbeleth,
year 2984 of the Third Age. The sun is slowly disappearing in the west.
You can see a waxing three-quarter moon to the south. Real time is Sun
Feb 5 13:33:59 2023 UTC. Last reboot due to a crash at Mon Jan 30
08:55:24 2023 UTC.

**Who**: This game command lets you see who is logged in. The
information you receive is limited by which side of the War you are
logged in as. You might be a hobbit that can see all elves, men, half
elves, and dwarves currently on. But you won't see any trolls or orcs
that might be on.

You can even narrow down the list of information like: who warrior, who
hobbit, who newbie, who ranger, who silvan, and many more choices. Type
**who ?** for the full lists.

`time, hints, news next, view warlord, view warshared, view war, weather global, weather dark global`

`who, who dwarf, who warrior, who newbie, who ranger, who troll, who legend, who ?`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Information About The Area or Zone**

What is a zone: A zone is approximately a 10 x 10 area of rooms in the
game. Most zones are roughly 100 rooms. Many effects in the game happen
a zone at a time. Storms affect an entire zone, so if it's snowing you
your room, it's snowing in the entire zone around you. If the room you
are in repops, the entire zone around you also repoped as well. Some
information in the game is a zone at a time, or a part of a zone.

Yell: This communication happens a zone at a time. For example, if you
**yell** in Bree, everyone in the Bree zone will hear you. If you
**yell** in Grey Havens - Harlond, everyone in the Harlond zone will
hear your yell. You can hear yells from anyone that yells in the zone,
even if they are on the other side of the war. So a troll can yell at a
hobbit, and vice versa.

Look Around: The **look around** command allows to scan the area around
you for smoke coming up from campfires. Lets you know if anyone is
camping near by. It's not a full zone scan, but it does a good portion
of one.

You carefully look around you. You see some light to the east.

**Weather**: Weather command gives you more localized information
instead of using **weather global**. You will get information about the
surrounding zones.

**Watchtower**s: Watchtowers are in many towns, cities, villages, and
more. Some trees, hills, or even mountains can also function as a
watchtower. You type watch to start scaning the area for any signs of
movements. If you search <direction>, like search south or search east,
you'll specifically look to see if anyone is out there. You can't search
an entire zone, but can scan many rooms within one.

**Map Rooms**: The **map rooms** command builds a small graphical map of
your immediate area. It is not an entire zone in size, but it's a good
portion of a zone. Helps you to see if features like rivers or roads
might be near.

`yell, weather local, look around, watch, search east, map rooms`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Information About The Room You Are In**

**Look** or **Examine**: These are 2 very similar commands, and will
sometimes even give you the same information. But other times they can
give you different formats of the information. Like if you look in
backpack or examine backpack, you'll get 2 different formats of whats
inside the backpack. Look or exam <character> as well. In a room you can
look <direction> to see what might be that way. If it gives you a
message, could be a secret or hidden exit.

Search: If an item is hidden in your room, you can type **search** to
find it. Just type **search**, and wait for the delay. There is a chance
you'll discover whatever was hidden in there. If you have higher
**Perception** or ranks in the **Search** skill, the chances of this
being successful go up. It just takes time, you can spam search more
times to find items as well.

Search is also used to find secret or hidden exits in a room. Sometimes
the **look** command can give you a hint that there might be a secret or
hidden exit there. Then search will help you find the exits "keyword" to
actually open or close it.

Search <effort> will help you find sneaking or hidden mobs or characters
in your room. The longer the search the greater chance of success, BUT
the longer it takes to try it.

If you KNOW the item that is in the room, you can use the **reveal**
command instead.

`reveal coin, reveal gem, reveal root`

`look, look w, exam, search, search n, search quick, search normal`

**Weather Local**: This command gives you weather information, but JUST
in your room. You can find out if its cold, windy, warm, snowing, etc...
This is a good thing to check before you sleep in a room. If you sleep
in a room that is too cold, you can easily end up catching the flu.

It's a sultry night, the sky is cloudless, and the temperature here is
warm. You can feel a strong wind coming from the north.

**Exit**: This command gives you information about the **exit**s and
rooms around you. You can also use the change **autoexit**s command to
set this up as you move from room to room. Note that exits that are
secret or hidden will not show up using the exit command. North -
Prancing Pony Inn -East- - Cobble Street -South- - Old East Road
-West- - Old East Road

**Scout**: You can get some information about rooms next to you using
the **scout** command. It can show you mobs in the room, and possible
exits. Beware, some rooms/exits in the game you simply fail the scout
attempt. And more scary, others will automatically PULL you into the
room you were trying to scout. This happens most often at oneway exits.

`weather local, exit, scout n, scout s`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Information about Gear and Shops**

Worn **Equipment**: Any time you want to see what you are wearing, just
type **equ** (short for equipment). It will display anything you are
wearing at the time. You can wear <item> or remove <item> if you want to
change the gear you are using.

Read help wear to find out all of the locations you can wear some items
on your character. There are a limited number of slots for worn items.
Like limited to 2 ring slots or 2 neck slots. You are using: \<wielded\>
a backsword (flawless) \<worn as shield\> a small wooden shield
(flawless) \<worn on body\> a soft leather jerkin (flawless) \<worn on
legs\> a pair of plain trousers (flawless) \<worn on feet\> a pair of
rigid leather boots (flawless) \<worn across back\> a shortbow \<worn as
belt\> a plain leather belt \<worn on belt\> a hunting knife (flawless)
\<worn on belt\> a lit lantern \<worn on belt\> a dark coloured flask
\<worn on belt\> a quiver

**Inventory**: Any time you want to see what gear you are carrying
around, type **inv** (short for inventory). It will display anything you
are carrying. There is a limit to how much you can carry in your
**inventory**, before it is full and you cannot pick anything else up.
Using a container, like a large sack, a backpack, a satchel, or belt
pouch you can put items into can increase the over all number of items
you can carry. You can **drop** <item> whenever you don't want it. If an
item is in your room you can **get** <item> to pick it up.

**Examine**: You can **exam** an item to read more about it. We call
this the item description.

**Consider**: If you have an item in your inventory, or are wearing or
holding it, you can **consider** <item>. This gives you a little bit of
information about the item, and also it's weight. This command is very
important for proper weight management. Don't travel too heavy or it
will eat up your moves very fast.

**Consider** also gives you information about how worn out or old an
item is, IF it has a condition with it. Type **help states** for more
information about an items age or condition. Some items give you lower
bonuses if they are worn out, like weapons, shields, armour, cloaks,
etc... This help file will show you about the (condition) of an item,
like how fresh and new is it is, or how old and worn out it is.

You need to **whet** or **mend** them to get the most bonus out of them
you can. Maintain your gear and it will help maintain you. You can
**whet** or **mend** some items to fix them up some. con dirk It is a
dirk (flawless, well-seasoned). This piercing weapon can be wielded
one-handed. It is good while attacking and average while defending; its
speed is very fast, and it inflicts average damage upon hitting. It is
light enough for you to wield effectively one-handed. It is starting to
look difficult to mend. It weighs a couple of pounds. con shield It is a
large wooden shield (flawless, new). It is poor while parrying. It fits
you well. It weighs nine pounds.

`equ, inv, rem shield, wear boots, drop meat, get mushroom, put bread sack, get flask backpack`

`wear lantern belt, whet, help states, con axe, con skin, con gloves`

**Compare**: The **compare** command lets you see how one item is
considered vs another item. You'll get some information comparing the
weight of an item, it's ability to absorb some damage if armour, or
parry hits if a shield or weapon, or speed of weapons. It's a quick,
useful way to see if a shop might have an upgrade for you.

Like compare broadsword longsword. Compare 56 59. Compare eq.boots
inv.boots.

You compare the longsword and the broadsword. Both the longsword and the
broadsword are one-handed slashing weapons. The longsword is noticeably
better when attacking but slightly inferior when defending. The
longsword is noticeably slower to swing but inflicts slightly more
damage with each attack. The longsword weighs five ounces more.

**Show**: This command allows you to consider an item that is for sale
in a shop, even though you are not wearing it or have it in your
inventory. You can **show** broadsword, or show a number for sale in the
shop. Show 113.

show broadsword It is a broadsword (flawless, new). This slashing weapon
can be wielded one-handed. It is awful while attacking and good while
defending; its speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon
hitting. It is far too heavy for you to wield effectively one-handed. It
weighs four pounds. A weaponsmith tells you 'It would cost you one
lauren and seven celeb.'

**Value**: If you are in a shop, and have an item in your inventory, you
can **value** <item>. This lets you know if the shop will buy that type
of item. If the shop buys it, they will also let you know how much the
will pay you for that item.

List: **List** command does just that, lists out what is in the shop for
sale. In a pet shop you'll get a **list** of pets. In a tailor shop,
you'll get a **list** of cloaks, shirts, hoods, etc... that they have
for sale. You can specify what you want listed, such as list shield,
list sword, list fine leather, list fine chain. If you list a number,
you get a list of all the subset of items under that number, list 45,
list 233.

Help files: Some items in the game have a help file entry, that explains
a little more about the item and what you can do with it. Here are some
examples: torch, salt, pan, lantern, backpack, snowshoes, rope, arrows,
bows, casseroles, cup, dice, and many more.

`help lantern, list cloak, show 124, list fine leather, value shortsword`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Information About Your Character**

This will be a list of commands you can use to get more information
about your character.

Helpfiles: There are many helpfiles in the game to give you more
information about your character in MUME. It can be your characters age,
race, subrace, abilities like Wisdom, Perception, Strength, and more.
Just type **help age**, **help race**, **help <your subrace>**, help
Intelligence, help Dexterity, etc... to find out more about the
character you are playing.

**Help !**: This command gives a list of recent commands you typed. The
game stores all of your recent commands you've given, and you can get
access to them.

**Score**: This command tells you what your current hit points, mana
points, and movement points are. It also tells you what your maximum of
those points are. Your maximum hit points will go up as you gain levels.
Your movepoints might go up a small amount depending what skills you
practice in game.

202/202 hits, 131/131 mana, and 97/97 moves.

**Score Report**: This command gives information about your 'score' to
everyone in the room. Its a faster, more efficient way of telling your
group how hurt or tired you are. If you try this command during combat,
you'll get a general idea, but not exact numbers.

You report 202/202 hits, 131/131 mana, and 97/97 moves.

**Stat**: The **stat** command can give you some fast information about
your character. Some of the information will be how much gold you carry,
if you are hungry or thirsty, or even drunk. It is often used to find
out your OB (offensive bonus), DB (**dodge** bonus), or PB (**parry**
bonus). After that is the confusing number % of armour. That is roughly
a suggestion of about how often and/or how much the gear you are wearing
(or armour spell you have up) will help to mitigate or maybe reduce the
damage you take per hit.

Under the % information will be a list of things that might be affecting
you in the game. Common ones you will see are any **poison**s,
**disease**s, or **wound**s you might have. But it can give positive
feedback as well. Such as spells that are currently active on you. Or if
any **herblore** or pipeweed effects are active on you.

**Stat** is a very commonly typed command, check it often. Also it's a
bit more efficient then using the **info** command in many
circumstances.

OB: 52%, DB: 28%, PB: 56%, Armour: 5%. Wimpy: 75. Mood: wimpy. Needed:
297,311 xp, 0 tp. Gold: 24. Alert: normal.

**Information**: This command gives a wealth of **information** about
your character. From where you are a citizen to how much weight you are
carrying. You can even customize the **info** you gain from this command
some. I would access this command somewhat often in the game, just too
keep track of **information** about who you are playing. Try **help
info** to get more choices of how you want to customize this useful and
flexible command.

You are a female Half-Elf. You are 103 years and 11 months old. You have
played 22 days and 13 hours (real time). Session: 14 mins. This ranks
you as Wren of the Subtle Magiks (level 40). You are six feet two and
weigh twelve stone and eight pounds. Perception: vision 45, hearing 20,
smell 5. Alertness: normal. You must have been sent to Arda to free it
from the sorrows that weigh upon it. You are welcome in Bree, Fornost,
the Grey Havens, Lórien, Rivendell, and the Shire. Your equipment weighs
eighty-nine pounds. That is really heavy! Your base abilities are: Str:9
Int:18 Wis:17 Dex:11 Con:14 Wil:18 Per:11. Offensive Bonus: 52%, Dodging
Bonus: 28%, Parrying Bonus: 56%. Your armour provides an average
protection of 5%. You have 202/202 hit, 131/131 mana, and 97/97 movement
points. Your mood is wimpy. You will flee if your hit points go below
75. You have scored 21,552,689 experience points and you have 144,252
travel points. You have been involved in some skirmishes against the
minions of the Dark Lord (2 wp). You need 297,311 exp. points and 0
travel points to reach the next level. You have 40 lauren coins, 13
celeb pennies, and 44 busc pennies. You are speaking Westron. You will
climb only when it is reasonably safe to do so.

Many experienced players check this information regularly.

`score, score report, stat, info`

**Consider**: This command, when used with mobs, gives you information
about how powerful it is compared to you. It compares YOUR level vs a
MOBS level. If you are the same level it will say "A perfect match!". If
the mob is lower level then you, you'll notice different explanations of
how easy it might be for you to take it on. If it says something like
"alot of luck" or "you'll need good equ" that means the mob is higher
level then you. You still might win a fight like that if you are full of
hit points and have good gear that is well maintained and **mend**ed. If
the **consider** sounds scarier then that, there is a good chance the
mob will defeat you.

`con wolf, con fox, con spirit, con `<player>`, con guard`

**Level**: This command shows you what you need for XP and TPs for the
next 5 levels. Every time you **level** up, it updates your list with
the next **level** you need.

Level 1 1 exp, 0 tp Level 2 1,000 exp, 100 tp Level 3 3,000 exp, 300 tp
Level 4 7,000 exp, 600 tp Level 5 14,500 exp, 1,000 tp ...But the list
does not end there...

**History**: This command gives a list of some milestones for your
characters adventures in the game. You might find out a little info
about when you've leveled or the manner in which you were killed while
adventuring.

On the 10th Ivanneth in the year of 1646, you reached level five in the
Juicy Meadow. You gained level four in a Smelly Barn. You reached level
three in the Ruins of Fornost.

On the 24th Narwain in 1677 of the Third Age, you were killed in the
Wightlord's Chamber by a hideous wight-noble.

**Achievement**: This is a list of notable events, deeds, quests, or
other records of your adventures in the game. Alot of information about
quests you've done can be briefly summarized here. Or places you've
visited or how much you have traveled.

You have barely started learning how to milk animals. You aided a hunter
in keeping the bandits of the Tower Hills at bay.

If you get the message "You achieved something new!", that means you
just got a new **achievement** added to your growing list. If it says
"That's a new experience!", you just did something you haven't done
before, and it might be an **achievement**. Like eating meat, casting a
spell, or traveling a great distance.

**Quest**: The **quest** log is a very powerful tool for keeping track
of quests you are on or quests you have finished. From this **quest**
log you can even get more information by typing quest <quest name> for
specific quest information. If you have gotten some quests from some
mobs in the game, use this command frequently to keep track.

If you get the game message "With the task complete, you feel more
accomplished.", that means the quest you just did gave you some XP as a
reward. Can range from 500 xp to 1000's of xp.

If you get the message "With the task complete, you feel more
travelled." , that means the quest you just did gave you TPs as a
reward. I've seen some at 250 TPs and up!

If you get the message "With the task complete, you feel more
knowledgable.", that means the quest just helped you learn the language
of whomever the quest was from.

You have learnt of quests in these areas: the Anduin Vale Eregion\*
Fangorn Rohan\* the Blue Mountains\* Eriador\* Lórien\* You are in
Eriador with the following unfinished quests: \* Araduin's request -
Araduin will point me to quests around Bree-land \* equipping Leonard -
Help young Leonard prepare for his future adventures \* furs and skins -
Collect the furs and skins for the Bree tanner \* libram of Curaen -
Navigate the glass maze under the Tower of Amon Sûl

**Herblore**: This command won't help much if you don't know any
herblores. However, if you do know some herblores, it will list which
herblores you know. It also will check the **herblore** ingredients in
your inventory or containers and tell you which herblores you can
currently **mix** and how many. If you type herblore <name>, like
herblore walking, you will be able to read the herblores description and
how to **mix** it.

**Trophy**: This is a record of all of the mobs and players you have
killed, and how many. It has a powerful effect on keeping track of how
much XP you can gain. The first time you kill a mob it is added to the
top of this list. It will keep adding numbers as you kill more of them.
This information will quickly grow to be several pages long. You can
even find out information about specific types of mobs like trophy wolf,
trophy bear, trophy snake. Check out **help trophy** for more
information.

171, 99%, a grey wolf 6, 7%, a wolf spider 1, 1%, a one-eyed old wolf

You will also see a % after the name. This % reflects how well you are
gaining xp from that type of mob. The first time you kill something you
get good xp for doing so. And for the next 10% of killing a mob, you
gain good xp. After that the amount of exp starts to noticably drop if
you are killing that mob often. Once the trophy hits 50% you will
notices significant reduction in the amount of XP you are getting.

`trophy, achievement, quest, level, history, herblore`

**Complain**: This command lets you see if you have done anything
illegal in any towns or if you have been a witness seeing anyone else do
anything illegal in towns. It can help you know if you might be arrested
in a town. It can also be used to report crimes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Change**

**Change**: This is a large over all or meta command that lets you
change multipe aspects of the game for your character. I suggest
learning this command after you've gotten some basics of the game down.
You might find you like changing some features of your character.

There is a LARGE LIST of features of the game you can change with the
change command. I recommend not changing alot of them at one time, but a
few at a time so you get used to the changes. You can always change them
back, or try out something else to change.

**Change Language**: This command shows what languages you can speak and
how well you can speak them. The numbers are a percentage system. You
are basically totally fluent in the language if it's 90%-100%. If you
are 75%-90% you'll understand the language pretty much all the time. If
your language is 50%-75% you might miss a letter here and there, or it
looks like it has some typos. If it's below 50% it is often very hard to
read it, if at all.

You have the following knowledge in these languages: 100 Beorning 100
Dunnish 100 Khuzdul 100 Quenya 100 Rohirric 100 Sindarin 100 \* Westron
78 Adûnaic 51 Orkish 50 Morbeth 43 Animal 4 Entish

Doing some quests in the game can help you learn more in a language.
Also spending alot of time listening to speakers of the language can
help you learn it. However, this is very much affect by your
Intelligence. A low Int character will learn the language VERY slowly
and probably max at around 70%? A high Int character will learn it fast
and max at 100%.

**Change Mood**: This command shows you what mood level your character
is currently at. The most defensive mood is "wimpy" the most commonly
used offensive mood is "aggressive". Players do not use mood "berserk"
very often, since if you do so, it means you CANNOT flee from a fight.
You fight until they die, or you do.

`chan mood` _ \| \| berserk \| \| aggressive \| \| brave \| \| normal
\| \| prudent \|~\|\<- wimpy / \\ \\/

Wimpy converts some of your OB into PB for more defense, blocking
attacks. Aggressive converts some of your PB into OB to help your
attacks hit more often.

**Change Alertness**: This command shows you what level your current
alertness is at. Most players leave it on normal 99% of the time or
more, because if you change it to be more paranoid, your regens all drop
ALOT. But if there is a backstabber threat near by, sometimes it pays to
raise it up.

Normal keeps your regen high as you can get it, but lowers your chance
to notice sneakers and hidden targets. Paranoid lowers your regen to
almost nothing, but increases the chance that you'll find a sneaker or
hidden target. If you are having issues with your regen, you might have
left your alert too high.

`chan alert` _ \| \| paranoid \| \| vigilant \| \| attentive \| \|
careful \|~\|\<- normal / \\ \\/ **Change Prompt**: Your prompt can have
alot of information in it, sometimes so much it can be confusing. You
can change what information is displayed in your prompt. Such as your xp
needed, info about swim, climb, ride, weather hints, and much more.

\*%~- CSW A1 M2 S3 HP:Fine Mana:Burning Move:Tired\>

That is alot of information in a prompt! So you can turn features of
your prompt on and off as you prefer. For example some things in a
prompt might be more useful for a scout or thief, but others might be
better for a caster. Customize it for what works for you or your
character.

`chan wimpy, chan alert, chan prompt, chan lang, help change`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Info Gathering With Skills**

There is some information in the game that can be more difficult to
discover. There are actually several skills and spells in the game that
can help with finding out some information. Even some herblores can help
with this. Some herblores can increase your Perception or how effective
your Awareness or Track is.

Please check out the **help** files for any of these skills or spells
for more information.

Skills: These can be practiced in the ranger or thieves guild. They can
give you access to some information in the game.

**Awareness**: Gives a slightly increased chance to notice mobs that are
sneaking or hiding.

**Search**: Can help you find hidden items in rooms or hidden/secret
exits.

**Track**: Helps some random exits areas of the games be less random.
You can find tracks of mobs, mounts, and other characters. You can even
follow the tracks if you want too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Info Gathering With Spells**

Spells: These can be practiced in the cleric or mage guild. They can
give you access to some of the information in the game.

**Detect Poison**: Over all a pretty useless spell in the game. If you
cast it on something, it lets you know if it is poisonous, venomous, or
poisoned. You can even cast it on a mushroom to see if it is safe to
eat.

**Detect Evil**: This spell lets you see the alignment of evil mobs or
players in the game. They will have a (red aura) if they are evil. It
does NOT tell you how evil they are. Some mobs are only slightly evil,
while others can be much more evil. This spell lasts with a good
duration. The men subrace of Dunedain get the benefits of this spell for
free.

**Detect Magic**: A great spell, many non-casters even use it. You can
see if any items are magical or enchanted. Even in lists in shops! It
also lets you see if anyone has cast magic recently in a room. If you
see a white aura of magic, means a good mob or character has cast in
that room recently. If you see a red aura means an evil mob or character
cast in that room recently.

**Detect Invisibility**: A spell that helps you see characters that have
the shroud spell on.

**Sense Life**: Gives a slightly increased chance to notice mobs that
are sneaking or hiding.

**Locate Magic**: Helps you to kind of get an area read out of detect
magic. Over all it is somewhat awkward to use.

**Locate**: Helps you to get "teleport key" from your location or room.
The "teleport key" is used with several spells in the game. If you have
the "teleport key" it can try to locate those as well.

**Locate Life**: You can sense if any mobs of a type are in range of
your spell. A common use of it is to locate hungry to see if any hungry
wargs are in the area.

**Identify**: This is a pretty powerful spell for gathering more
information about objects and items in the game. It can also give you
"teleport key" information about an object as well.

**Divination**: This spell gives you information about characters or
mobs instead of items. You can get a "teleport key" for a mob by using
this spell. You can also know more about the mobs offensive and
defensive toughness, it's type, or level.

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")
 