---
title: Newbie Guide Cities and Settlements
tags:
  - Guides
  - Newbie Help
---
**Guide Cities and Settlements**

This guide written and published by p(Baca/Endo)

"In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet
hole, filled with the ends of worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry,
bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a
hobbit-hole, and that means comfort."

JRRT, The Hobbit

This guide is about cities, settlements, villages, and more locations in
MUME to visit and explore.

Many parts of this guide reference to the MUME help pages which can be
found at: <https://mume.org/help/help_index>

**Bold** words can be looked up in the games help files. Like help
**citizenship**.

Also some cities are in the help files, they will be **bold** as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are many cities, towns, villages, and settlements in MUME, most
are based off of Tolkien's works, and a few smaller ones are in for
fleshing out the setting.

This guide will be going over the of the services and features you can
find inside and outside of the cities and settlements in the game.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Where do Saruon's forces live?**

The focus of this guide is where the **dwarves**, **elves**,
**hobbit**s, and **men** live. But I'll briefly mention some details
about where Saruon's strongholds are.

**Troll**'s main lair are the Troll Warrens, under the Trollshaws
forest. Pretty close to where Bill, Bert, and Tom were in The Hobbit
(they are in the game too, try to avoid at low levels). Trolls do have a
few other caves in the game that are friendly to them, but don't really
provide much in the way of services. Other than a rent troll.

**Black Númenóreans** do not have any towns or villages, but they can
visit Tharbad whenever they'd like too.

There are 3 main orc caves, all in the Misty Mountains. From N to S
there is the **Zaugurz** orc caves in the cold north of the Misties. The
**Tarkhnarb** and **Morruhk** orcs share Goblin Town (also known as New
Orc Caves, or NOC). And further south near Moria is OOC, or Old Orc
Caves.

Lastly there is the stronghold of Dol Guldur, located in southern
Mirkwood. A place where Sauron seems to be drawing his strength and
forces for a dark purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Map of MUME**

In the game type **help map** to get alot of information about how to
learn more about areas in the game. Type **map** to see areas near you,
and **map global** to see the entire game. Capital letters on the map
are major cities or other areas.

X = your current location
B = Bree
G = Grey Havens, both Harlond and Forlond
D = Blue Mountains, sometimes called Dwarf Homes
F = Fornost
= = the Brandywine Bridge on the east side of the Shire, west of Bree
T = Tharbad (dangerous town for low levels to visit)
R = Rivendell
C = Lothlorien
A = Ingrove in the Anduin Vale
Also the major cities in the game have maps of them you can carry around
in your **inventory**. They also load in several places in the game to
help you find your way around. You can buy most of those maps in general
stores in towns as well.

Just type **look** map with the map in your **inventory**.

The **Library** in Grey Havens Forlond also has a map room in it, with
many of the maps in the game found there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Mmapper**

If you are using **mapper**, you can scroll around the map and try to
explore a city a little bit before you visit it. Scrolling and scanning
around on the mapper is a great way to get a heads up of an area before
you visit it. One of the handiest things is to look around while you are
not logged in. It is not as good as actual **map** knowledge, but its a
great way to start. You can know where there might be food, water,
**mounts**, trails, roads, and more.

You can also see some of the **terrain** you might be walking through.
Try **help terrain** for more about how MUME's landscape affects you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Citizenship**

Smaller towns and villages do not have **citizenship**s. But major
cities do. You must visit a secretary and **say** 'citizenship'. The
secretary will inform you if you can or cannot become a citizen, and
what you need to do to get it. Once you have the citizenship it is
permanent, unless you break the cities laws and lose it.

If you **pray** to a town at character creation you get a free
citizenship with that town. Only some towns are pray-able by some races.

Getting a **citizenship** might require paying for it, doing a
**quest**, being the correct **race**, or having a good enough
**alignment**.

Some cities do not let you inside the **gates** if you are not a
citizen. They close their **gates** at night and open them during the
day. You can also ask another citizen to open the **gates** for you.

When you are a citizen of a town, outside the gates you type **call**
for entry. Inside the gates type **say open**, to have the guards open
them.

A few gates in the game require you to **knock** to get inside.

**JAIL WARNING**: All of the larger towns have guards that will arrest
you for wielding weapons or casting spells in town. A few towns do allow
weapons being wielded for non-citizens. Remember to remove weapons when
in doubt!

### Getting Citizenships

This is a list of cities that you can get a citizenship for as a
character of the Forces of the West.

**Tower Hills**: This village has no citizenship. Every dwarf, man, elf,
and hobbit are welcome. You can wield weapons and cast in the village.

**Bree**: It costs 1 gold per level to buy this citizenship at the
secretary. There is also a quest from the elder in Tower Hills to get a
Bree citizenship for free. If you complete the quests in Tower Hills,
you will get a letter to the Bree secretary for a free citizenship. If
you are low level and ask for a Bree citizenship, you might get a quest
to follow a treasure map. The rewards from the treasure map will help
you afford to buy a Bree citizenship.

**Fornost**: It costs 1 gold per level to buy this citizenship at the
secretary. If you are low level and ask for a Fornost citizenship, you
might get a quest to follow a treasure map. The rewards from the
treasure map will help you afford to buy a Fornost citizenship.

**Shire**: If you are a hobbit, you can get a Shire citizenship for
free. Either by praying there or asking for one. If you are NOT a hobbit
you have to do the Shire Wolf Pack quest. During the winter, once a
month (3 times each winter), a large wolf pack loads in the Shire,
eatting hobbits. There are like 10 different types of regular wolves in
this pack AND 4 very tough great wolves. To get a citizenship you need
to have a great wolf killed and on trophy and take a fur from butchering
their corpse. The great wolf corpses have 100% chance to give a fur when
butchered. You turn the fur in at the Shire secretary in Michel Delving.

**Grey Havens**: The citizenship here counts for both sides of Grey
Havens, Harlond and Forlond. Grey Havens is a welcoming city, and anyone
can visit it at any time of day with out a citizenship, the gates will
magically open for any good aligned player. To get the citizenship is
free, but you must have a good alignment. Elves can get this citizenship
easier then other player races. To keep your alignment up, don't kill
any "good mobs" like farmers, children, hobbits, etc...

**Rivendell**: This city is tricky to enter, you must be standing in
specific rooms and type 'seek rivendell' to find the special secret path
to enter. Much like Grey Havens, you have to keep your alignment up to
get a free citizenship.

**Tharbad**: This lawless and dangerous city has 2 secretaries, one at
the North city gates and one near the Inn. Beware the North city gate
has 4 aggressive gateguards that will attack you while you are trying to
get the citizenship. The only way to get a citizenship in Tharbad is to
pay ALOT of money, it can easily cost over 100 gold. Many players in the
game do not bother getting a citizenship here.

**Blue Mountains**: If you are a dwarf, this citizenship is easy to get.
Just walk to the basement and ask at the King. For all other races, you
must do a VERY difficult quest to get this citizenship. You have to
travel into Moria and retrieve the remains of a dwarven ancestor and
bring them back to the King in Blue Mountains. This quest is really only
fit for Heros and Legends and usually takes a group to do it.

**Lorien**: Elves and half-elves that are good can get a citizenship in
Lorien pretty easily. You just walk in, and ask at Celeborn for a
citizenship. For all other races, it is a long challenge to get a Lorien
citizenship. First, you CANNOT even enter the forest or city without a
elf or half-elf leading you in. Then you must turn in evil or orkish
items to be destroyed. The elf Ecthelion that runs the weapon and armour
shop can destroy armour, shields, and weapons. Celeborn can destroy some
other items, such as cloaks, robes, etc... As the elves destroy your
evil items, you gain xp AND gain credit toward a citizenship. After
enough items are destroyed, you can get a citizenship from Celeborn.
Warning, it can take MULTIPLE trips of sacks full of evil items to get
this citizenship completed. There is also a quest west of town, that can
give non-elves permission to enter the Golden Wood. That may help you
get this done.

**Ingrove**: Another town where you must do a quest to get a
citizenship. There are 3 different quests that can qualify you for a
citizenship. At lower levels you must help repair a old hobbit mill and
get it working again. Or find the mob Narv who lives in a homestead far
north of Ingrove and avenge the murder of his wife by killing the
assassin responsible. Or at higher levels, you have to help repel a raid
of wargs attacking a village just west of Ingrove, and bring the
butchered head of the chief warg and turn it in for a citizenship (hard
fight).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Justice System**

Some smaller villages in the game do not have a **justice** system.
There are no guards and no laws are enforced and they do not have city
wide protection. Major cities, however, have guards, **jail**s, and laws
to follow. We often call this the **Justice** system.

To see if you have broken any laws and gotten caught in the game, type
**complain**. That will show you if your or anyone you've seen, has
broken any laws.

Major cities also have **Jail**s. If you break any laws you will get
arrested by the guards or some other citizens. They will warn you a few
times to **follow** them. I recommend following them as fast as you can
type **'follow** guard'. After being warned a few times, they will stop
warning you and asking you to **follow** them, and instead will attack
you since you are not following their laws or rules. Some city guards
are pretty tough and can kill you for not following their city laws.

A couple of minutes in **jail** is much safer the being attacked by
guards. Also jails have food and water in them, if you need any.

A common law many players break is, if they are not a citizen of a city,
they either **cast** spells or **wield** a weapon. **Remove** your
weapon before you enter town and do not **cast** in town.

If you are a citizen of a city and break laws, you lose your
**citizenship** and will be arrested.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Guides Between Cities - Young Rangers**

On the roads between many of the cities of the West are young rangers.
If you are low **level**, they will **give** you food and drink if you
need it. They can lead you from one city to another, and give you a
message of which city they are walking toward next. They **yell** when
any signs Saruon's Minions are spotted, possibly giving you notice to
escape.

Young rangers offer a few tips about areas you are passing through, and
will lead you on the main trails, roads, and paths between towns. If you
don't know they way, they can show it too you. All you need to do is
**follow** ranger.

Some of the towns they visit are **Bree**, **Fornost**, pass through the
**Shire**, Greenholm, Tower Hills, **Grey Havens** - Harlond, and **Blue
Mountains**.

Areas the young rangers do not visit are **Rivendell**, Ingrove,
**Lorien**, or **Tharbad**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **City Services**

Cities offer a wide variety of services! Next, this guide will cover
what you can commonly do in most cities in the game. It does vary from
city to city, and from village to village. Some of the services are
actually located just outside of the city, instead of inside. Also
several cities have some small neighboring villages not far from town.

**INN** - All major cities and larger villages have an **Inn**. An
**Inn** is where you **rent** to log out of the game. Renting costs some
money, and the prices vary depending on which city it is, your **race**,
if your a **citizen**, and how much gear and gold you have. If you run
out of money after renting, they innkeeper will take all of your gear as
payment. You can pay the innkeeper later to get your gear back out, but
it can be very expensive if you had good gear.

Type **offer** to find out how much renting will cost you. Type **rent**
to log out. You might need to wait for some **noquit** to end before you
can **rent**.

**STABLES** - **stables** are where you rent **mounts** or **pet**s to
save them as a ticket for later. Type **rent** horse or **rent** falcon.
**Trade** your ticket in later to get them back out of rent.

**MOUNTS** - a few villages and cities have free **mounts** you can use
from their **stables** or corrals.

EATING AND DRINKING - many towns have a water source for drinking and
filling up skins. Some also have some food somewhere in town. Explore
and see what you can find to eat!

Some elf towns have a cook that will prepare free food for you if you
walk into their room hungry, and give you a sack with snacks in it!

And every city and even some small villages have a general or grocery
shop to buy cheap food. Bakers are also in some towns. You can eat for a
few copper or a silver.

**MAILBOX** - an in game mail system where you can send and receive mail
from other players

**BOARDS** - **Boards** are from back in the day when you could not have
a web browser open at the same time you were playing MUME (mostly
because web browsers were not invented yet). Today other internet
options somewhat fulfill the role that these boards used to be used for.
Since they are used so rarely today, I'm not going to include them in my
city information. Please read some of them if you are interested.

The boards are: Warrior, Thief, Mage, Cleric, Tales, Jail, Out of
Character, News and more...

CITY TOUR GUIDES - Some of the major cities have a mob that is a tour
guide inside of the city, somewhat like the young rangers do between
cities. They will ask newbies and lowbies if you want a tour of town.
They will show you around, shops, guilds, secretaries, etc. Kinda useful
if you've never visited that town before. They are usually found at the
main fountain in the city. Follow them so they can show you around.

MERCENARIES - warriors for hire. You might find a **mercenary** in some
cities, wandering around waiting for an employer. Be ready to have a
pile of silver to hire them.

SHOPS - Cities have a variety of **shops**, even some smaller villages
have one. There are grocery shops, general shops, travelers shops,
taverns and bars, fishmongers, boat captains, armour shops, weapon
shops, sometimes combination armour/weapon shops, herbalist shops, pet
shops, jewelry shops, and many others! Explore around and see what they
will **sell** and **buy**. Or **value** to see what you might get for an
item.

**GUILDS** - The **guild** choices are Rangers, Warriors, Thief, Cleric,
and Mage. Not every town has a **guild** for every class. Also some
guilds are 'low level' guilds, and you may out pace them after level
6-7, which means you need to visit another town for a higher level
guild. Some guilds are more of midlevel, and you might out pace them
after level 12-13. Other guilds are high level and go up to the maximum
you can learn. Some rare guilds you might need to pay to access, or find
where it is hidden.

Some guilds offer some basic weapons or other gear you might be able to
use.

**QUEST** GIVERS - several towns have **quest** giving mobs or **quest**
turn in mobs inside the town or just outside of town.

**WATCHTOWERS** - some towns have **watchtowers** to see what is
approaching the city. Go up the tower and type **watch** to start
generally looking around. To look a specific way type search east, or
search south.

Near some watchtowers, guards barracks, and city walls, you can find
some free gear the city uses for defense if you need help with some
basic items.

BEDS - many towns have a bed or bench you can **sleep** on in town
somewhere. Beds slightly increase your **regen**, so **sleep**ing on
them can save you some seconds or minutes gaining hits or moves. Check
out homes or parks to find them.

ENTERTAINMENT - some towns have harps you can play, **chessboard**s you
can play on, or blackjack dealers you can gamble at. Even **archery**
targets to have a shooting contest.

**LEGEND HOME** AREAS - several major cities have legend homes around in
them, OR have a defined **legend home** neighborhood. Legend homes are
very expensive, but some players use them to rent at. Legend homes will
be locked to you, so don't be surprised by a few locked doors in major
cities.

**TRAVEL POINTS** - you get a small bonus to **travel points** for
visiting new areas you have not been to before. Also some parts of town
with out shops or a guild do not get visited very often. It is pretty
easy to grab a quick 40-60 travel points in a city very quickly and
safely, or more! Rarely visited villages are even better at this then
commonly traveled towns. Visiting many of the cities and villages in
this guide should add up to plenty of **travel points** for you.

SPECIAL FEATURES - some towns have something rare, like a bath house,
boiling oil for defense, magical gates, harps, hidden entrances or
exits, and more!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TRANSPORTS

Some towns have various transports in them. It could be a ferry inside
or just outside of town, a ship you can board, or a coach that travels
to other towns.

#### Ferry:

Sometimes a ferry might cost some silver to use, or might be free. Some
ferries are driven by you, the rider. Ferries driven by a mob run on a
schedule, and usually go back and forth every 4 minutes or so. There are
guided ferries in between Grey Havens Harlond and Forlond and in between
Harlond and Valinor. There are self propelled ferries in eastern Shire
and south in Lorien. And a special ferry that can be used by both sides
of the game SE of Lorien, across the Great River.

#### Ship:

There is a special White Ship that can take good Heros and Legends to
sail west to Valinor from Harlond. There is also the Grey Ship that once
a day travels between Grey Havens Harlond and Tharbad. Both ships are
free, but the timing is important. If you miss the ship taking off, you
will need to wait an entire MUME day to catch it again. The Grey Ship is
one of the easier ways into and out of Tharbad.

#### Coach:

There is the Coach as well. From North to South, it has stops in
Fornost, Mewlip Inn, Bree, Jasper's Tavern, and Tharbad. There are
actually 2 coaches constantly running. A coach will make every stop and
wait for passengers. If it arrives in Fornost or Tharbad, you are
ejected from the coach, that's the end of the line. To ride the coach,
you need to buy a coach ticket and have it in your inventory. They cost
about 8 silver at each of those coach stops. If you travel to Tharbad
regularly, it's a good idea to have a spare coach ticket on hand, just
in case.

## **Cities and Settlements of MUME**

This large list of all of the Forces of the West. It starts from Tower
hills and covers villages near there. Then the guide goes to cities in
the West. Then Breeland area is next. Cities and villages toward
Tharbad. Then the Free Peoples towns near Misty Mountains and out East.

Also this guide is pretty LONG! I recommend that if you are looking for
a specific city, town, or village, to use your Ctrl F function to search
for text in the page. Or whatever your computer or browser uses for Find
in Page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Tower Hills:

N of the Road to Grey Havens, E of Grey Havens, NW of Aldereon's
village, W of the Shire

Tower Hills Village, also called Black Hill Village is on the north side
of the Tower Hills. It is a good starting area for new and returning
players, and anyone that is lower level. It is also the most **quest**
dense area of the game.

CITY SERVICES: inn, mailbox, stable

SHOPS: armour/weaponsmith, herbalist, general/grocer, bartender

GUILDS: warrior, mage, N of town ranger and cleric, SE of town thief

QUESTS: several quest givers in Tower Hills give a series of quests, as
you finish one, you will be offered another one after that. Maelton
wants you to help out folks in town, Leonard wants gear, Ellie lost her
doll, apprentice weaponsmith wants help with jobs, herbalist wants 3
rare flowers, ranger guildmaster N of village help finding lost items,
hunter SE of village wants help killing pests, pony breeder at farm S of
village needs help protecting ponies

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, beds, mounts N of town and S of town,
fireplace N of town

## Elven Chief Wine Village:

S of Tower Hills, N of Road to Grey Havens

A small village with a few services to offer, and a challenging quest
for low levels.

QUESTS: elven chief gives a quest to recover his stolen wine barrel

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, mount, bed, some gear

## Hidden Elven Valley:

S of Road to Grey Havens and Elven Chief Wine Village, SW of Aldereon's
Village, difficult to find

A small elf village south of Road to Grey Havens, and on the southern
parts of Tower Hills range. You can **call** at the village gates like a
major city to open.

OTHER SERVICES: drink, watchtower

## Aldereon's Village:

A larger elven village N of Road to Grey Havens, pretty close to the
road, SE of Tower Hills, W of the Shire, NW of Greenholm, E of Grey
Havens

A larger elven village that offers some services. You can **call** at
the village gates like a major city to open.

CITY SERVICES: inn

SHOPS: bartender/grocer

QUESTS: Aldereon gives a quest for Walking herblore

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, mounts, fireplace, some free gear

## Greenholm Village:

A hobbit village S of the road to Grey Havens, pretty close to the road.
W of the Shire and E of Aldereon's Village and E of Grey Havens.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable

SHOPS: barman, general/grocer shop

OTHER SERVICES: drink, mounts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Grey Havens:**

W of Shire, SW of Tower hills, S of Blue Mountains, Road to Grey Havens
leads there

**Grey Havens** is actually 2 major elf cities, on opposite sides of a
large bay. Harlond on the east side and Forlond on the west side. It has
many services to offer, and is regularly one of the first major cities
players visit. Please remember to remove your weapon and not cast
spells, otherwise you will visit the jail.

Grey Haven's gates magically open for any Free People's characters that
are not totally evil.

CITIZENSHIP: you only need one citizenship for both sides of the cites.
To get your citizenship you need to simply be somewhat good alignment,
and you get the citizenship for free. So battle with evil mobs like
skeletons, spirits, robbers, thugs, etc.. to earn your citizenship here.
Elves can get this citizenship easier or sooner then other races.

### GH - Harlond:

This is the fabled, ancient elven city that Cirdan the Shipwright is
lord of. It is famous for being the last connection to Valinor and lands
of the West. There are a few legend homes, so don't be surprised by some
locked doors.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, mailbox, secretary, jail, city guide
Curiful, legend home services

SHOPS: 3 bartenders, baker, grocer/general shop, fishmonger, pet shop,
tailor, armourer, weaponsmith, herbalist. Another pawn shop outside of
east gate.

GUILDS: all low to mid levels, ranger, warrior, thief, cleric, mage

TRANSPORTS: **ferry** between Harlond to Forlond (might cost silver),
grey **ship** to Tharbad and back to Harlond, White Ship to Valinor and
back

QUESTS: cleric guild master quest, quest S of the east gate for the
elven weaver

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, elven cook that hands out food, bench/bed,
some gear, chessboard, clock, harp, fireplaces, watchtower, herbal kit
upgrade

### GH - Forlond:

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, mailbox, secretary, jail

SHOPS: bartender, fishmonger, tailor, general shop, boat captain,
jewerly shop, weapon/armour shop, fishing shop, tanner shop NW of town
on trail

GUILDS: high level mage and cleric

TRANSPORTS: ferry Forlond to Harlond (might cost silver)

QUESTS: tanner shop NW of town has a quest

OTHER SERVICES: drink, bench, clock, map room in the library

## Lairesur's Village:

S of GH Harlond east gate is a nice elven village.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable

SHOPS: grocer

QUESTS: mobs that help with high level quest in town and NE of town

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, clock, some gear, fireplace, watchtower,
near town is a resting grove (helps regen)

## Elven Fishing Village:

SW of GH - Harlond, along the coast, where a river pours into the ocean

SHOPS: fishing shop, bartender

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, bench, fireplace, boat

## Valinor and Tol Eressa:

Far, far W of Grey Havens Harlond, across the ocean

In the game we call it "sail west", much like some characters did at the
end of the Lord of the Rings. You must ask Cirdan the Shipwright in Grey
Havens - Harlond for permission to sail west on the White Ship. If he
finds you worthy enough, he'll take to a special pier. There the White
Ship arrives around midnight to sail you across the sea.

CITIZENSHIP: you cannot get a citizenship here, and there is no
secretary. You can't even gain access unless Cirdan says its ok for you
to visit. You need to be level 21 or higher to attempt to get
permission.

CITY SERVICES: inn

SHOPS: bartender

TRANSPORTS: ferry between Avallone to Alqualonde (it's free), White Ship
to Grey Havens Harlond and back

QUESTS: Istari quest, create focus

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink on the White Ship and in the inn, magical
pools that help with creating a focus, room to create focus, room for
Istari quest

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **The Shire:**

large area E of Grey Havens and W of Bree

This is the largest "city" in the game. The justice for **Shire** is
spread out over like 9 zones. However, the hobbits are some what less
forgiving then other cities. You can wield in the Shire at all times and
not be bothered. But they really dislike casting from non-citizens. And
will toss you in jail because of it.

The Shire also has some sizeable towns, and many small villages, I'll
try to summarize them up here in this section. All added up, it offers
about the same services as any other major town, but some of it is very
spread out. This is the list of settlements from west to east.

CITIZENSHIP: hobbits can automatically start with a citizenship in the
Shire if they start there, and can get a Shire citizenship later if they
don't. Other races must complete a quest of defending the Shire from a
very scary and powerful wolfpack during the winter months. You need to
have a great wolf on trophy and turn in one of the butchered furs into
Michel Delving secretary. See the Mayor in Michel Delving to start the
quest.

There are legend homes scattered all across the Shire, if you keep
running into locked doors you cannot open.

QUESTS: the wolfpack for citizenship tends to happen in the N and E
parts of Shire, but only during the 3 months of winter, a difficult
quest for lower levels (it's like 14 wolves in the pack), also a lonely
giant can be found in various parts of the Shire to teach a cooking
herblore if you do a quest

### Michel Delving:

E of Aldereon's village and Greenholm, western side of the Shire, right
on the Old East Road

Sort of the capital of the shire, but not alot there... often
abbreviated MD.

CITY SERVICES: secretary, jail, legend home services

SHOPS: pawn shop (buys some stuff other shops don't)

QUESTS: turn in of great wolf furs at the secretary for citizenship, you
can also start it at the Mayor

OTHER SERVICES: water, pipeweed near by

### Waymeet:

Literally 2 rooms along the Old East Road... that's about it.

### Tookbank:

S of the Old East Road and Waymeet, E of Michel Delving, W of
Tuckborough. Another 2 room village.

SHOPS: the only weapon/armour shop in the Shire

### Tuckborough:

E of Tookbank, S of Hobbiton, W of Stock and Woodhall, end of the Path
to Stock

A medium village, with most of it being underground in burrows.

SHOPS: Pipeweed/herbalist shop

QUESTS: SE of village is the Shire Tanner that can turn furs/skins into
items

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, mounts, chessboard, some gear, pipeweed near
by

### Hobbiton and Bywater:

W of Brandywine Bridge, NE of Michel Delving, N of Tuckborough, W of
Frogmorton, N of the Old East Road

The largest town in the Shire in MUME. Hobbiton and Bywater are
basically joined, and I'll treat them as one location.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, mailbox

SHOPS: general store, tailor, pet shop, boat captain, 2 bartenders

GUILDS: ranger guild W of Hobbiton, a hobbit only thief guild master
wanders the area

QUESTS: hobbit shopkeeper in Tailor shop wants help finding his lost
daughter, a plump hobbit wants some dumplings from Bree

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, clock, fireplace, boats load close to town,
some herbs

### Frogmorton:

E of Hobbiton, W of Brandywine Bridge.

Another small village on the Old East Road. Has a collection of small
farms just directly S of the village.

SHOPS: bartender

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, boats load near by

### Woodhall:

along the Path to Stock, S of Frogmorton, W of Stock

SHOPS: a bartender and a general/grocer shop

OTHER SERVICES: water

### Rushey:

S of Woodhall and Stock.

A village along the Causeway trail, near the Brandywine River.

CITY SERVICES: stable, inn,

SHOPS: grocer, bartender, boat captain

TRANSPORTS: a ferry that travels across the Brandywine River is NE of
Rushey, it's free

OTHER SERVICES: water, mounts and food at Maggot's Farm, just N of
Rushey

### Witfurrows:

E of Frogmorton and Hobbiton, W of Brandywine Bridge

OTHER SERVICES: mounts

### Scary:

N of Witfurrows

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink

### Stock:

N of Rushey, S of Witfurrows

SHOPS: bartender, general shop

GUILDS: warrior (only teaches hobbits)

OTHER SERVICES: water

### Standelf:

1 room village, easy to miss. South of Bucklebury, east of Rushey across
the river.

### Bucklebury:

E side of the Brandywine in Buckland, S of Brandywine Bridge

TRANSPORTS: a ferry that travels across the Brandywine River, it's free

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink

### Dwaling:

very NE corner of the Shire. N of Brandywine Bridge, or NE of Scary and
Hobbiton.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable

SHOPS: bartender, general shop, baker, fishmonger, fishing shop, and a
special pet shop. It is the only place in the game you can buy a dales
ponies. You must be a Shire citizen and a hobbit or a dwarf.

OTHER SERVICES: water, boats, fireplace

### Brandywine Bridge and Newbury:

W of Bree, E of Hobbition

Not a village, but an important landmark in the Shire. It is the eastern
boarder of the Shirelands. There is the only city gate in the Shire,
which can let you into Buckland if you are a citizen. The village of
Newbury is just inside the gate.

SHOPS: boat captain

OTHER SERVICES: a locked gate leads into the Old Forest

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Blue Mountains (Dwarf Homes):**

N of Grey Havens Forlond

**Blue Mountains** is a different type of major city. There is 2 levels.
The top level is accessible by anyone. The lower level is citizens only.
So the information will be done by split levels.

**Blue Mountains** is also rare because it has a very difficult area
connected to the top level. There is a type of super mob area you can
get access to from inside the city. Careful going down to the Theddin's
mines, its dangerous solo or at low levels.

CITIZENSHIP: only **dwarves** can easily get a citizenship to Blue
Mountains. Any other races have to do a dangerous quest all the way into
Moria. Few non-dwarves are citizens of Blue Mountains.

### Blue Mountains - Top Level:

CITY SERVICES: inn, jail, stable E just outside of the gates

SHOPS: pet shop, baker, jewelery shop, general shop, pipeweed shop

QUESTS: Nodri jewellery shop quest to get an herblore, mini-quest to
enter Theddin's Mines

OTHER SERVICES: water, clock, mounts at stable, chessboard, boats (in
town and just east of town), watchtower (citizens only)

### Blue Mountains - Lower Level:

CITY SERVICES: inn, mailbox, city guide Thurn (loads with King Thorin)

SHOPS: locksmith shop, tavern keeper, ore/mining shop, leather shop,
potter shop, toy shop, wool shop, armourer, weaponsmith

GUILDS: high level warrior, mid level thief and ranger

QUESTS: Vig quest in help to find some wood, citizenship quest from the
King involving a trip to Moria

OTHER SERVICES: clock, fireplace, lockpick upgrade, herbal kit upgrade,
mends shining

### Dwarf Mine:

E of BM, N of GH - Harlond

QUESTS: part of the elven dye maker quest dwarf dye maker lives here,
quest starts S of GH Harlond East Gate

OTHER SERVICES: some rooms you can mine in, some rope loads

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Bree:**

S of Fornost, E of Brandywine Bridge and Shire, N of Tharbad

Bree is somewhat the main hub of the game, standing at the crossroads of
major highways, going East to West is The Old East Road, and North to
South are the Greenway, and Road to Fornost.

CITIZENSHIP: there are 2 different quests to get a Bree citizenship, or
you can just buy citizenship for 1 gold per level

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, secretary, jail, mailbox, city guide Janice,
legend home services

East of Bree on the Old East Road is also the Forsaken Inn for renting.

SHOPS: baker, barman, grocer/general, tanner, herbalist, pawn shop, pet
shop, weaponsmith, armour

GUILDS: low level thief, ranger, mage, warrior guild (you have to pay to
enter), high level cleric west of town (the Druid)

TRANSPORTS: coach stop

QUESTS: Tanner quests, hunter quests, barman quest, baker quest,
fletcher quest, weaponsmith quest, Araduin/Clint quest, secretary quest
for citizenship AND part of Maelton quest from Tower Hills

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, beds, clock, fireplace, chessboard, some
gear, watchtowers, mercenaries, archery target, blackjack dealer

### Archet, Staddle, Combe:

Villages N of Bree, all very close to each other

SHOPS: 2 bartenders

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, bed in Combe, pipeweed in Staddle,
chessboard in Archet, fireplace in Archet, some gear

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Fornost:

at end of the Road to Fornost, N of Bree

**Fornost** was one of the last cities of the Kingdom of Arthedain or
Arnor to fall to the forces of Angmar and the Witch King. The city has
been party rebuilt, with some of the ruins of the old city still
standing. That's called Old Fornost, and for the most part you want to
be careful there as a low level. It is a somewhat tougher area right
west of town, beware if you are low level. Also witch is a tougher mob
just E of gates, watch yourself.

S of Fornost, on the Road to Fornost, is the Nasty Mewlip Inn, a small
bar/grocer shop. It is also a coach stop.

CITIZENSHIP: You can buy a citizenship for Fornost for 1 gold per level.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, mailbox, secretary, jail, city guide Fardur,
legend home services

SHOPS: baker, 2 barman, tailor, pet shop, grocer, general shop,
herbalist, pawn shop, armour, weaponsmith

GUILDS: low level mage and cleric E side of town, low level thief in
town, mid level thief guild W of west gate (need a password from Olly to
get in), high level ranger and warrior

TRANSPORTS: coach stop

QUESTS: barman is part of a quest from Bree, and Olly is part of a quest
from Bree, mini-quest to become age **Ancient** at Alchemist

OTHER SERVICES: water, fireplace, chessboard, clock, beds, watchtower,
bath house (helps regen, costs a gold), mercenaries, archery target

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Treetop Village:

far S of Bree and NW of Tharbad, hidden up in the trees of a forest
canopy

SHOPS: baker, tailor, grocer

OTHER SERVICES: watchtower, NE of village loads mounts on a farm and
food

## Jasper's Tavern:

N of Tharbad and SE of Treetop village

A tavern with a few services, right along the Road to Tharbad.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, spring near by

SHOPS: barman, general shop

TRANSPORTS: coach stop

OTHER SERVICES: watchtower, barrels, minstrel

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Tharbad and The Sewers:

end of the Road to Tharbad, far S of Bree

**Tharbad** is the most dangerous town in the game. It has bandits,
thieves, muggers, and even assassins wandering around town waiting to
steal from you or attack. There are not as many laws in Tharbad, you can
wield and cast there all you want, even as a non-citizen. In fact you'll
have to wield due to all the aggressive mobs.

The **Tharbad** gates are open during the day, but lock at night. It can
be very difficult to get out at night, and many players get trapped in
side for a little while. One way to avoid this is use Tharbad's
transportation services, the Grey Ship from Grey Havens or the coach.

Also, do not trust Tharbad guards. If they yell at you and tell you to
follow them, don't do it. Tharbad has no jail, they just get rid of your
body...

Under Tharbad is a even more difficult area called Sewers, home of
villans, smugglers, assassins, thieves, thugs, and more. Only go there
if you are very well prepared.

CITIZENSHIP: Getting a citizenship in Tharbad is VERY expensive, and can
cost over 100 gold. It's also somewhat easy to lose if you ever attack a
guard. The secretary to get a citizenship is in a room with aggressive
guards at the north gate.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, 2 secretaries (the important one is hard to
use), mailbox

SHOPS: 2 bartenders, baker, thieves shop, grocer/general shop, armourer,
weaponsmith, boat captain, poison vendor in Master Assassin sewers

GUILDS: 2 thief guilds in town, 1 assassin guildmaster below in sewers,
all high level, cleric, mage, both high level

QUESTS: the old gentlemen guild master on the rooftops has a quest about
a lost key, Master Assassin has a quest about a lockpick upgrade,
scarred man in MA sewers has a quest about an herbal kit upgrade,
mini-quest in sewers under Tharbad from assassin guildmaster about
lockpick upgrade

TRANSPORTS: coach stop, grey ship to Grey Havens

OTHER SERVICES: drink, clock, bed, chessboard, mercenaries, blackjack
dealer

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Stoor Village:

W of Last Bridge, E of Brush and Neni area, S of Old East Road

A small village of Stoor hobbits, lacking most services.

SHOPS: fishmonger

QUESTS: Stoor chief is turn in for rescuing a hobbit from Troll Warrens

OTHER SERVICES: water, boat, mount, some gear

## Caravan (or Caravanserai):

S of Warrens, E of Last Bridge, W of Rivendell, just S of Old East Road

The Caravan is a small resting spot off the road. You can knock
sturdydoor to get inside.

SHOPS: bartender/general shop

OTHER SERVICES: clock, fireplace

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Rivendell:

E of Warrens and Last Bridge, far W of Ingrove

The fabled hidden Last Homely House of Elrond is the newest major elven
settlement in Middle Earth. Entry to this city is very tricky. You have
to be in some special rooms outside of town and type seek rivendell to
find the secret path to enter. Seeking is slower at night or if darkness
is up around Rivendell, it's faster during the day. There are no city
gates.

CITIZENSHIP: Similar to Grey Havens, just be good aligned and you should
get it for free.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, mailbox, secretary, jail, legend home
services

SHOPS: grocer/general shop, jewellery shop, herbalist, boat captain, pet
shop, tailor, bartender, armourer/weaponsmith

GUILDS: ranger, warrior, 2 mage guilds, cleric, are all high level, and
mid level thief

QUESTS: Elrond is involved with a few quests, Quenaire speaks about
legend foci and is involved with a quest

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, elven cook that hands out food, clock,
archery target, harp, fireplace, chessboard, evil item turn in at
Erestor

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Ingrove:**

E of Vale Ford and Small Village, S of Honey Village, Hornburg, and
Beorn's homestead. Right along the road, pretty easy to find.

No young rangers this far away east. But there are some roaming Beorning
wardens and Bears that might protect you in the area near Ingrove. Vale
Ford crossing the Anduin can sometimes be a traffic area for Orcs, so be
wary. The Orc Caves are not very far away W, and Mirkwood is nearby...
Try to avoid any of Mirkwood at lower levels.

CITIZENSHIP: Ingrove is a challenging town to get a citizenship in if
you are not a Beorning. There are 3 different quests to becoming a
citizen. Fixing an old Hobbit Mill in the area, helping out an old man
Narv way north of town fight a challenging assassin, or protecting the
Small Village from a raid of powerful wargs during the winter. The
hobbit mill quest and helping Narv are level limiting quests, so you
have to do them early. And the wargs are simply hard, so doing them at
lower levels is dangerous.

There is no secretary in town to get a citizenship from. You can wield
any weapons you want in town, but do not cast, they will throw you in a
bear cage (their jail)!

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, jail, mailbox

SHOPS: grocer/general shop, baker, herbalist, armour/weaponsmith, pawn
shop

GUILDS: ride is learned N of town in Honey Village, ranger, warrior,
thief, mage

QUESTS: quest giver Hag, Farmer Ocher SE of Ingrove, hobbit mill quest N
of town, Narv far N of town, quest turn in Loryen in Ingrove

OTHER SERVICES: water, watchtower, some gear, clock, bed/bench,
chessboard, fireplace, archery target

### Small Village:

NW of Ingrove, NE of Vale ford, SW of Beorn's homestead

QUESTS: raided in winter by warg pack

OTHER SERVICES: water, mounts, watchtower

### Honey Village:

N of Ingrove, S of Honburg, Beorn's homestead is NW

GUILDS: riding trainer, ranger guild ride skill only

QUESTS: beekeeper part of Hag quest

OTHER SERVICES: mounts

### Honburg:

N of Honey Village and Ingrove, NE of Beorn's homestead

SHOPS: baker

QUESTS: baker part of Hag quest

OTHER SERVICES: water, 2 fireplaces

### Beorn's Homestead:

NW of Ingrove and Honey Village, SW of Honburg

Be careful to NOT attack his bees, dogs, sheep, or ponies. Beorn will
protect them and beat you down for doing so, and he's powerful.

QUESTS: part of warg pack quest Beorn for Ingrove citizenship

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, fireplace

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Lorien and the Golden Wood:**

NE of Fangorn Forest, E of Moria, far SW of Ingrove

Lothlorien or the Golden Wood is really a large area, about half as big
as the Shire. It is protected by a magical barrier, where only elves and
citizens can enter. If you are not a citizen, you need an elf or a
half-elf to lead you past the barrier inside of the Golden Wood. Once
inside, you can move around to where ever you want to. You can also cast
and wield, but don't attack any of the elves or other good creatures
inside.

Caras Galadhon is the actual city inside of Lorien. You need to knock on
the gates to get inside the city. Most of the services are inside the
city, but some are located outside in the Golden Wood. You'll also find
some places to climb up into the elves tree houses.

CITIZENSHIP: Elves and half-elves can get citizenships easily in Lorien.
Non-elves have to prove themselves to the elves first by turning in evil
items. You can turn in weapons, shields, and armour to Echtelion to melt
down. You can bring cloaks, and some other items to Celeborn. As you
turn in items to be destroyed, you earn some XP. It takes 1000's of XP
from these item turn ins to become a citizen. Some races have to turn in
for more XP then others.

CITY SERVICES: 2 inns, mailbox, city guide Randir, Celeborn is
"citizenship" elf, no secretary, stable is south of the river near the
ferry

SHOPS: in town are a separate shop for mending weapons/armour, tailor
shop, weapon/armour shop, jewelry shop, out W of town is a
tanner/leather/fletcher shop and an herbalist

GUILDS: high level mage, mid level warrior, ranger, and thief (they both
wander around in town), outside of town and NW is a high level cleric,
and a special archer guild is W of town

TRANSPORTS: free ferry that goes N and S across the Celebrant river,
anyone inside the Golden Wood can use it, just type board

QUESTS: librarian is involved with 2 quests, cleric guild master gives a
quest at night, Galadriel gives a high level quest, white stag outside
of town is a quest, Cirel has a mini-quest to make elven rope, just E of
town elf Coubhel is involved with a quest, Echtelion involved with a
quest for an elven food bag, and far NE of town elf Niuldor involved
with a quest to upgrade herbal kits, far W of Lorien is an elf Tethel
involved with a quest to get access the Golden Wood

OTHER SERVICES: clock, elven cook that hands out food, bed, archery
target, some gear, mounts, boats, a place to rent boats W of town,
resting stone W of town on trail (helps regen), evil item turn in at
Celeborn and Ecthelilon, mends shining

### South of Lorien:

Just some scattered services south of Lorien that you might find useful.
Not really a village or town

CITY SERVICES: inn (expensive) just south of the Golden wood and
Celebrant river, mailbox

TRANSPORTS: Ferry that travels across the Great River Anduin, can be
control by elves OR evil men, but you can also operate it yourself

QUESTS: the elf Taurion has a mini-quest that can turn orkish shortbows
into elven shortbows, a ghost of the man Dagnir offers a quest (night
time only)

OTHER SERVICES: scattered food/drink, a watchtower in a tree

### Jeraton Hunting Lodge:

N of Fangorn Forest, and SW of Lorien and the Golden Wood

A sad hunting lodge that has fallen on hard times. If you help them out
you can get a gift.

QUESTS: quest givers Berel and Jeraton to find a nice, newer woodaxe

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, bed

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Fangorn Forest:

SW of Lorien, S of Moria, NE of Rohan Fort

Like the Shire, this is a large area of multiple zones that somewhat
acts like a city. You can wield weapons all you want here, and defend
your self against the insects and aggressive plants. You can even cast
spells.... except any fire or lightning spells. The ents frown upon
that, or fire of any kind, even campfires are not allowed! Some of the
water in Fangorn is magically refreshing. You cannot get a citizenship
for Fangorn Forest.

CITY SERVICES: justice but no jail, don't piss off the trees or ents

QUESTS: Ent Beechbone quest to find item in old house, Ent imposing
beech orc axe quest, Treebeard involved with 2 quests, sad tree with
herblore quest Leaf-Cake, elderberries involved with a quest up in
Lorien

OTHER SERVICES: drink Entwash river (magically refreshing!), resting
stone near Quickbeam (increases some regen)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Rohan Fort on the Eyot:

NE of the Fort is the south border of Fangorn Forest

This really is more like a Fort then a town. You cannot get a
citizenship here, but you can still break their laws. You can wield all
you want, but cannot cast in town. The rent here is somewhat expensive,
but also handy when you are far south.

There is a Dunlend shop NE of the Fort that sells very nice arrows, but
only to races of Men.

CITY SERVICES: inn, stable, mailbox, jail

QUESTS: Haldin very hard quest wants help stopping some Dunlendings,
Rengold the Bard involved with a quest from Fangorn

OTHER SERVICES: food/drink, bed, some gear, mounts, fireplace,
watchtowers, archery target

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **MUME's Farms:**

There are dozens of farms and smaller homesteads spread out across the
**map** not mentioned here. Some of them are several rooms large, some
smaller. Many of the farms do actually have some services. It is common
to find food and drink in some farms. Some might have a fireplace to
**cook** at or a bed to **sleep** on. Several farms have **mounts** that
you can use, ponies, donkeys, pack horses, mountain mules, and more. A
few are infested with rats, bats, spiders, or other small pests.

Finding some gear in farms is also common. Clothes, tools, a few simple
weapons, pails and more often load in them. Another resource at farms
are cows. You can **milk** cows into containers like pails or skins, so
you can carry and drink **milk** later. It's very filling. You can even
use **milk** to **cook** up a dish in a **casserole**.

Farms can also be a useful place to visit if you are looking for
**travel points**, as not many players frequently visit them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Hunters and Hermits:**

A few hunters are spread through out the game, with small camp sites.
They might have a fire, some water, maybe food at them, but over all do
not offer many services. Hermits living out in the wilds usually have
even less to offer. A few of them might be part of a quest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Explore and visit as many of these towns and villages as you can. You
might find neat items in shops, gather many travel points, learn a new
place to rest or quickly grab a mount, or discover a new quest you
haven't tried yet!

Many players try and get as many citizenships as possible for their
characters. You don't lose them if you die, and it can over all lower
how much you pay in rent in the game. And gives you more choices of
cities to retreat to if danger is near.

Link back to the wiki guides:

- [Guide](Guide "wikilink")
 