---
title: "Portal"
permalink: "/Portal/"
---

**Portal** is a [mage](mage "wikilink") [spell](spell "wikilink") with
[mana](mana "wikilink") cost 90 that allows to move groups of people
from one location to another by opening a portal from one
[room](room "wikilink") to another. In order to cast portal, you need to
use [Locate Life](Locate_Life "wikilink") to locate someone in the
target room to get the [magical key](magical_key "wikilink") and then
to:


\> cast 'portal' <direction> <magical key>

(where <direction> is the direction in the room you are in that the
portal exit will get created in). The portal lasts for a few ticks and
can be entered by typing:


\> enter portal

You may follow people into portals, and you may ride into portals if the
room on the other end is rideable. Portals leading into a room may be
noticed if you are using [Detect Magic](Detect_Magic "wikilink"); if you
are very skilled in Detect Magic, you will even see the magical key of
the room the portal is coming from. Note that, even in the case of a
successful portal to the intended destination, the key of the
destination room as shown by [Detect Magic](Detect_Magic "wikilink")
will not necessarily be the key that was used to portal, but may be a
newer key even if the old key is still valid.

Even when cast without [backfire](backfire "wikilink"), portal has a
noticeable failure rate if going to a location that is more than just a
couple of [zones](zone "wikilink") away. This failure rate may be quite
high for characters below [legend](legend "wikilink") level, characters
that have not [practiced](practice "wikilink") portal to maximal
possible percentage, or characters that are aiming to portal very far. A
failed portal, also called a *misportal*, opens into a random locateable
room that may be quite far away from the target room. A [Black
Númenorean](Black_Númenorean "wikilink") may misportal into a room that
Black Númenoreans cannot [Teleport](Teleport "wikilink") or portal from.

[Category: Mage spells](Category:_Mage_spells "wikilink")