---
title: "Pray"
permalink: "/Pray/"
---

In the Halls of Mandos, this command is used to transport yourself to
one of the main towns and cities of Middle Earth. The locations to which
you may choose to pray are dictated by your race and citizenships. The
first time you pray, or if you have no citizenships for any other
reason, you may pray only to the hometowns for your race, and will be
made a citizen of that place, unless you are wanted there:

Elves, Half-elves: the Grey Havens, Lòrien Men:
[Fornost](Fornost "wikilink"), [Tharbad](Tharbad "wikilink") Dwarves:
the Blue Mountains Hobbits: [Shire](Shire "wikilink") (Hobbiton)

Everyone can pray to [Bree](Bree "wikilink"), while only citizens may
pray to [Rivendell](Rivendell "wikilink"), only evil humans may pray to
Tharbad; and various other restrictions also apply.

Note that "praying to a city" ONLY works in the Halls of Mandos, not
elsewhere!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other function of the "Pray" command is to send a message to all
immortals that are logged on. This is thus a rather powerful command and
you should not use it unless the issue is important and only immortals
can solve it. For instance, if you can ask a visible immortal via tell
and get the necessary response, this is considered far better than
simply praying.

By the same reasoning, immortals should not use pray as a replacement
for tell.

The policy for prayers are that the mortal should indicate what the
problem is in his prayer:

Good prays:

\- can I have a [newbie](newbie "wikilink") kit? - my strength suddenly
decreased from 17 to 1, what's up? - Morgul blade disappeared, but it
was Sauron's darkness - [Fornost](Fornost "wikilink") warrior guild
isn't working

Bad prays:

\- I need to speak with a V+ please? - Can I speak to a god? - I have a
problem - Can someone help me?

The point again: the pray should include enough information to say what
the problem is, NOT what person you'd like to talk to.

Example:

` > pray Harry won't open the gate for me, even if I am citizen`

See also: [Narrate](Narrate "wikilink"), [Sing](Sing "wikilink")