---
title: Retire
tags: ["Help files"]
---
There are two reasons for you to **retire**: to prevent auto deletion of
your character or to obtain a limited [reroll](reroll "wikilink") or
[practice](practice "wikilink") reset. It is also possible for you to
obtain an age reset after you've been retired for a real year.

Your characters have a limited lifespan after you log off, before they
are deleted, irrespective of how much [gold](gold "wikilink") or
[equipment](equipment "wikilink") they have for renting. This time
period is approximately (Level - 1) \* 5 Real Life days. If you will be
unable to log in for an extended period and yet want to return at a
later date with the same character you need to retire him/her.

In order to retire you must go to a
[receptionist](receptionist "wikilink") and type
"[rent](rent "wikilink") retire" twice. There is currently a requirement
that you have at least one item such as a loaf of bread and 1 coin such
as a copper (a busc in the Elven tongue). This restriction might be
lifted in the future. Also note that you still need to have enough money
to rent for 30 days to be able to retire.

The cost of retiring is the same as 30 days of rent. However, once you
have retired there will be no further cost. If you wish to check the
cost of retirement before you actually retire you may do so with the
command "[offer](offer "wikilink") retire" at a receptionist.

To leave the retirement home you use the "[leave](leave "wikilink")"
command. If you leave before you can reroll or pracreset, you will not
get a refund and you will not be able to use the "pracreset" and
"reroll" commands.

Pracreset allows you to reset your practices, "reroll" lets you make
small changes to your [statistics](statistic "wikilink"). They may be
used any time after 30 days of retirement\*, but they must be used WHILE
YOU ARE STILL RETIRED. Please do not "leave" before using "reroll" or
"pracreset". If you do so the gods will not grant you a reroll/reset and
you will have to retire for 30 more days\* to obtain it.

- NOTE: for [legends](legend "wikilink") who retire(d) on or after
  February 1, 2004, it is ONE YEAR, not 30 days!

If you have been retired for a real life year, "agereset" will allow you
to reset your age to base age. Similarly to pracreset and reroll, this
command has to be used before you leave retirement.

When you log on in retirement, you are told how long you have until you
can leave, reroll, pracreset or agereset (if you were retired normally
and can obtain these without the help of a V+).

People who retired before this change have two options:

1\. If you want prac-reset or reroll: Do not do anything, wait until
your retirement expires, then do "pracreset" or "reroll" and "leave".

2\. If you do not want prac-reset, but want to play right now: Type
"leave".

Some special notes:

1\) [BNs](Black_Númenórean "wikilink") can now "camp rent retire" or
retire at Karash (in Dark Tower) and gaunt man.

2\) Low level retired characters might get deleted after long periods of
inactiveness. While the details of this purging is not specific it is
generally safe to assume that "long" is greater than one year and low
level refer to characters under level 20.

3\) Characters under level 6 cannot "rent retire."

4\) Retired [Istari](Istar "wikilink") cannot get an age reset.

5\) [Sauron-listed](Sauron's_List "wikilink") people cannot rent retire
and can only be retired in exceptional circumstances.
