---
title: Rules Banking
permalink: /Rules_Banking/
---

Banking is storing items and gold so that you may have a source of new
equipment should you for some reason lose your old equipment. Bank
characters usually have lots of gold and have tons of good equipment.
When discovered, bank characters lose all equipment; both bank and
"client" can be subjected to harsher punishments as well - for instance,
loss of levels.

Another obvious form of banking is to hide or hand off your equipment
for safekeeping whilst you deliberately [DT](DT "wikilink"). Similarly,
hiding equipment before you get pkilled is only allowed if you don't
recover it (or tell anyone else about it). Clearly, this also applies to
leaving your equipment or gold in the safe- keeping of another character
whilst you go off into a risky situation. The same applies to obvious
variations with the same intention: giving equipment to mobs, hiding it
in rooms, etc.

A slightly less obvious form of banking, is making multiple legendhome
payments without spending any of the money on upgrades. In the helpfiles
on legendhomes, it is specified that players may make a maximum of 2
payments (one down payment and another payment of the balance), after
which they must spend that money before being allowed to make another
payment. There may be certain cases in which a third payment is
justified, however those cases must be explicitly approved by the
legendhome supervisor, and that third payment would most certainly be
the final one. Four or more unspent payments on a legendhome are very
clearly banking.

It is also forbidden to exchange equipment between characters which
belong to the same player. If you own characters A and B, you cannot
transfer equipment or money between them, neither directly (which
involves multiplaying) nor indirectly (for instance, A gives C an iron
ring, rents, logs in B and gets the ring back; or, A hides the ring,
rents, logs in B and reveals it).

The only exception to what is said above is if character A gets killed
by another player's orc, and - later - character B kills that orc (or
vice versa). Obvious suiciding by char A and the Orc is of course not
allowed.

The minimum punishment for equipment exchange is destruction of the
exchanged equipment, though usually the punishment is much harsher.

See also: [Rules Character](Rules_Character "wikilink")

[Category:Rules](Category:Rules "wikilink")