---
title: Rules Actions
permalink: /Rules_Actions/
---

An 'action' (or a 'trigger') is allowing a client to automatically react
to game output and perform some task whose purpose is to send a command
back to the game. It is irrelevant here if the command is immediatly
sent back by the client or if the user has to press some key to validate
it (i.e., auto binding keys).

Since actions grant a computer-enhanced reaction time, their use is
forbidden in contexts where they might provide an advantage on other
players.

Actions are tolerated when they do not depend directly or indirectly
upon another player event (Personal actions), but are illegal otherwise
(External actions).

Thus actions whose purpose is to, eat or drink, ride a mount that just
threw you off while exploring, open a door closed by a zone reset or a
mobile, loot a fallen mobile, would all be legal, but track or attack an
opponent, open/close a door someone just closed/opened or you bumped
into because an opponent made you flee, loot a fallen opponent, ride a
mount that just threw you off while chasing an opponent, etc, would not.

If you find the above rule too complicated to understand, you can stick
to the following principle that includes the rule: disable actions in
PK.

Rule created on Dec 21 2000, Manwë. Last modified, Sep. 5 2004, Manwë.

Furthermore, it is illegal to trigger other people's actions on purpose
by the use of emotes, says, etc.

See Also: [Rules-Robot](Rules-Robot "wikilink")

(By Justice Post 35:) All actions in a PK SITUATION, which ENHANCE a
player's tactical advantage over another player are illegal. If you are
in doubt, DISABLE all actions in PK situations.

[Category:Rules](Category:Rules "wikilink")