---
title: Rules Posting
permalink: /Rules_Posting/
---

These are very simple rules to follow on all mortal boards. If you fail
to observe the rules, it is likely your post will be moved or removed.
After repeated infractions you run the risk of having your privilege to
use that board removed.

1\. Use the correct board for the post. For instance, do not post about
clerics on the General board if you can post it on the Cleric board. Do
not use a public board when a mail to someone would suffice.

2\. Post with the right character. If you are an elf and want to post on
the troll-board about your exploits as an elf, don't log on a troll and
discuss your elf. The same goes for mortal-immortal relationships, i.e.
an immortal should not post on the orc board about his/her dwarf.

3\. Do not post maps or statistics of mobiles or objects. This
information is not for general release. At best the information should
be vague and at times misleading. For advice contact one of the
management.

4\. Do not post for information on how to do such-and-such. For instance
a post on "how do I fill a lantern?" is best served by asking a fellow
player. Posting a list of secret doors and mobs, or posting "mail me to
get the secret door list", is also forbidden.

5\. Do not post items for sale/wanted. Also, don't advertise any out-of
MUME stuff unless it is MUME related: e.g. Web pages set up for MUME are
ok, generic homepages and adverts for other MUDs are not.

6\. Do not post long files of captured output. All captured output
should be edited to only show what is absolutely necessary. Buffer-posts
of more than four pages invariably attract criticism or deletion.

7\. Out of Character information is tolerated to some extent, but not
when it concerns advocacy of serious RL issues: e.g. political parties,
abortion, religion, economic systems, law and order etc. Please don't
bring your soapbox to MUME. (The one exception from this rule is known
to the Ainur). For more stringent rules regarding InCharacter posting,
see the relevant rules.

8\. Do not post who plays which character. Even if you don't role-play,
some do, and even those who don't will not appreciate this tactic. The
exceptions are: - Player in question has made it generally known who
their characters are, eg posted as G, player of X/Y/Z. - Said player has
posted the characters of someone else who does not come under the
section above.

If in doubt about conflicting with one of these rules, you should ask
someone if you are relatively new to posting and posting-etiquette.

See also: [Board](Board "wikilink") , [Rules
Incharacter](Rules_Incharacter "wikilink")

[Category:Rules](Category:Rules "wikilink")