---
title: Rules Sauron
permalink: /Rules_Sauron/
---

Sauron's list is a list of people acknowledged by Sauron as his
followers, due to their chosen path of player-killing other members of
the free races (dwarves, elves, humans, half-elves, hobbits).

You may see the list's members by asking Sauron himself - using "tell
sauron list".

A player who is on the list has Real-Death, which means when they die
they lose all levels and regress to level 1. Players on the list also
get very evil alignment, and find themselves rather unpleasantly hunted
by the guards of the Elven towns. They possibly have other towns revoke
their citizenship and give them the 'wanted, dead or alive' status.
Tharbad is exempt from this.

The point of having the list, is to focus the playerkilling on MUME into
the good/evil conflict between the free people and the dark races (orcs,
trolls, black numenoreans). The dark races were created for the purpose
of letting people with an urge to player-kill do so. Darkies can kill
anyone in the game with few restrictions (Sauron's list only applies to
"whities" killing other "whities"), and they pay for this by suffering
certain penalties.

[Sauron's list](Saurons_List "wikilink") is administered by the Valar,
and is thus subject to certain controversies regarding who gets put on
the list and why etc. The most basic criteria used when listing a
"suspect", is: "If it's obvious or can be deduced otherwise that the
player kills for the sake of playerkilling, list him/her". Therefore, a
person who kills someone who just stole his sword, or as vengeance for
some wrong (within reason), like when legend groups have their own
personal wars or quarrels, won't get listed. On the other hand, someone
who is continually involved in killing other people and each time uses
the "I'm roleplaying" excuse, will be listed since it's fairly obvious
they are into it for the sake of killing.

A player can be listed for as little as one kill, according to the
criteria above, if it's obvious it was done just for the sake of
killing, or if the victim was an Istar or Istar's apprentice. The thing
we want to avoid is of course the "hmm let's see I can kill 5 people
with this char without getting listed" logic, that's why we leave the
"limits" fairly floating - and if you want to avoid the dreaded "list",
the recipe is very simple, stay out of playerkilling except in cases
where someone attacks you first for example.

People on Sauron's list are among the worst enemies of the free peoples
of Arda - therefore other people should avoid them or fight them.
Characters associating with a member of Sauron's list will soon find
that helping such criminals or trading with them can corrupt them to the
degree that they themselves face the dreaded List.

Attacking or killing a member of Sauron's list does not entail any
punishment by the Ainur.

In almost all cases, getting on Sauron's list is a one-way trip to
realdeath. It might happen, very rarely, that a member of Sauron's list
will redeem himself. In these cases, the character might be given a new
chance - after proving himself worthy of the Ainur's pardon. A pardoned
pkiller who reverts to his murderous habits will be considered hopeless,
and will stay on Sauron's list until death finally takes him.

You can roleplay an evil thief if you want to, but you will face the
list if you kill other whities. The reasons for the list are purely
game-technical, and aren't based in roleplaying. Simply put, we want
MUME to be a suitable mixture between a chaotic PK-mud and a mud where
people don't kill each other. Therefore the dark-white race war exists,
and therefore normal playerkilling should be discouraged.

See also: [Rules-PK](Rules-PK "wikilink")

[Category:Rules](Category:Rules "wikilink")