---
title: Rules Character Separation
tags:
- Rules
---

The basic rule here, is that character knowledge separation must exist.
You are NOT allowed to use the knowledge gained with one character with
another character, regardless if they are same race or not. Since this
is impossible to demand in some cases (if you know a
[zone](zone "wikilink"), you know a zone, for example), we usually limit
the "knowledge" definition to things like knowing where players are,
where dropped objects are, where corpses are, what players are playing
etc - dynamic knowledge.

To **help** enforce this, we have some rules regarding how long you have
to wait before switching characters. These rules are automatically
enforced by the login code. NOTICE that adhering to the following rules
don't exclude you from the above mentioned basic rule of character
separation.

#### Trading equipment between characters:

Note that helping one of your characters obtain [EQ](EQ "wikilink") with
the help of another, even if indirectly, is illegal. E.g. using
MyWarrior to [buffer](buffer "wikilink") wightlord, so Joe the
Groupmember can loot the grey cloak and pass it on to MyMage (or keeping
the grey cloak so he can give his OLD grey cloak to MyMage). This
naturally applies to equipment obtained by [PK](PK "wikilink") as well.

#### Keeping other peoples characters separate:

Lastly, while keeping your characters separate you should also take care
not to break the character separation of others such as
[narrating](narrate "wikilink") or in any other way publicising other
people's characters.
