---
title: Sauron's List
tags:
- Rules
---

**Sauron's list** is a list of people acknowledged by
[Sauron](Sauron "wikilink") as his followers, due to their chosen path
of [player killing](player_killing "wikilink") other members of the free
races ([dwarves](dwarves "wikilink"), [elves](elves "wikilink"),
[humans](human "wikilink"), [half-elves](half-elves "wikilink"),
[hobbits](hobbit "wikilink")).

You may see the list's members by asking Sauron himself - using
"[tell](tell "wikilink") sauron list".

A player who is on the list has Real-[Death](Death "wikilink"), which
means when they die they lose all [levels](level "wikilink") and regress
to level 1. Players on the list also get very evil
[alignment](alignment "wikilink"), and find themselves rather
unpleasantly hunted by the guards of the Elven [towns](town "wikilink").
They possibly have other towns revoke their
[citizenship](citizen "wikilink") and give them the 'wanted, dead or
alive' status. [Tharbad](Tharbad "wikilink") is exempt from this.

The point of having the list, is to focus the playerkilling on
[MUME](MUME "wikilink") into the good/evil conflict between the free
people and the dark races (orcs, trolls, black numenoreans). The dark
races were created for the purpose of letting people with an urge to
player-kill do so. Darkies can kill anyone in the game with few
restrictions (Sauron's list only applies to "whities" killing other
"whities"), and they pay for this by suffering certain penalties.

Sauron's list is administered by the [Valar](Ainur "wikilink"), and is
thus subject to certain controversies regarding who gets put on the list
and why etc. The most basic criteria used when listing a "suspect", is:
"If it's obvious or can be deduced otherwise that the player kills for
the sake of playerkilling, list him/her". Therefore, a person who kills
someone who just stole his sword, or as vengeance for some wrong (within
reason), like when legend groups have their own personal wars or
quarrels, won't get listed. On the other hand, someone who is
continually involved in killing other people and each time uses the "I'm
[roleplaying](roleplay "wikilink")" excuse, will be listed since it's
fairly obvious they are into it for the sake of killing.

A player can be listed for as little as one kill, according to the
criteria above, if it's obvious it was done just for the sake of
killing, or if the victim was an [Istar](Istar "wikilink") or Istar's
apprentice. The thing we want to avoid is of course the "hmm let's see I
can kill 5 people with this char without getting listed" logic, that's
why we leave the "limits" fairly floating - and if you want to avoid the
dreaded "list", the recipe is very simple, stay out of playerkilling
except in cases where someone attacks you first for example.

People on Sauron's list are among the worst enemies of the free peoples
of [Arda](Arda "wikilink") - therefore other people should avoid them or
fight them. Characters associating with a member of Sauron's list will
soon find that helping such criminals or trading with them can corrupt
them to the degree that they themselves face the dreaded List.

Attacking or killing a member of Sauron's list does not entail any
punishment by the Ainur.

In almost all cases, getting on Sauron's list is a one-way trip to
realdeath. It might happen, very rarely, that a member of Sauron's list
will redeem himself. In these cases, the character might be given a new
chance - after proving himself worthy of the Ainur's pardon. A pardoned
pkiller who reverts to his murderous habits will be considered hopeless,
and will stay on Sauron's list until death finally takes him.

You can roleplay an evil [thief](thief "wikilink") if you want to, but
you will face the list if you kill other whities. The reasons for the
list are purely game-technical, and aren't based in roleplaying. Simply
put, we want MUME to be a suitable mixture between a chaotic PK-mud and
a mud where people don't kill each other. Therefore the dark-white race
war exists, and therefore normal playerkilling should be discouraged.

See also: [Rules PK](Rules_PK "wikilink")
