---
title: Scout Guide
---

Credits: Originally By Locram
([source](https://mume.org/forum/viewtopic.php?p=5970&sid=b7d0ef4db9c9ab9ad8f057abce07658c#p5970)).
Please edit, update, and improve!

### Scouts in Mume

Scouts in mume are distinct from other classes in their ability to
[sneak](sneak "wikilink") and [backstab](backstab "wikilink"). Sneaking
makes you practically invisible to other players and mobs, as long as
you enter their room and not the other way around. In order for sneak
(and all skills that require you to sneak) to work you need to have
SUPERB sneaking, that is over 101% sneak (percentages are visible when
typing practice at a guild master).

It is possible to sneak with less than 101%, but you will fail up to a
third of your sneak attempts if you have 99% or less. The other thing is
that you can't sneak good if you carry heavy equipment. So check info
when you pick things up, if it goes above a tad uncomfortable, you need
to lose some weight.

### Race Options

All scouts skills, except envenom and attack are
[DEX](Statistic "wikilink") and [PER](Statistic "wikilink") based, in
that order, and you need above 101% in order to have a working scout.
[Dwarves](Dwarves "wikilink") do not make great scouts not only due to
bad stats, but they also get a severe malus to sneak, which makes them
an overall bad choice.

There is no reason statwise to play a [half-elf](half-elf "wikilink")
scout, so that leaves us with the choice of [man](man "wikilink"),
[elf](elf "wikilink") or [hobbit](hobbit "wikilink"). Elves it seems,
make the best scouts, since they get high bonuses to DEX and PER.
However elves get a malus in str, con and wil and lower [move point
regen](Movement_points "wikilink"). Elves get a free citizenship in
[lorien](lorien "wikilink") and cannot become sick in MUME.

Hobbits get bonuses to dex, con and wil, but malus to str and int.
Hobbits also get a bonus to backstabbing (higher sucess rate) if they
remove their shoes. Trolls do 33% more damage against hobbits, and
hobbits cannot ride big [horses](Mount "wikilink") (warhorse, horse of
the rohirrim, pack horse, docile horse).

Men get no bonus or malus to stats. This leaves you with low scout
percentages and less room to get none scout skills, such as
[bash](bash "wikilink") or high [endurance](endurance "wikilink"), but
gives you a higher stregnth that allows you to carry more.

### Stats

Having a given stat gives you a certain max percentage when practicing a
skill. This percentage is augumented or worsened by your other skills,
depending on their class. This means that if you practice sneak for
instance, and get 106%, then you put 10 pracs in endurance your sneak
will become lower. This also affects other aspects of your character,
such as OB/HP/DB/PB. Raising any [warrior](warrior "wikilink") skill
will increase hp and ob, and also raise all other warrior skills.
Raising any scout skill will increase db, lower hp and ob and also give
you higher scout skills. Ranger pracs do not affect any stats or other
skills.

This means that for any type of scout you want as LOW scout percentage
as possible, but you want to keep it above 101%, so that you can sneak
still. This will give you the highest possible OB, PB, HP and
regeneration, and you'll still be just as good with the shooting,
sneaking and backstabbing. This also means that you need very high
percentages in dex/per if you want to play a combo character, and
slightly lower dex/per if you want to play a more pure scout.

For someone making a more or less pure scout, with few pracs in out of
class skills, a man scout is probably the best, since they get no malus
and high hp/strength. For someone making a more warrior combo type scout
you'll need the extra dex/per the elf or hobbit offers. With hobbits
it's possible to get very high hp, since you get more con than men and
you are able to prac more endurance sice you have better scout stats, on
the other hand you'll have trouble when facing trolls, and the malus to
strength means you won't be able to carry as much equipment and still
sneak, so it's a tradeoff.

As previosuly mentioned, DEX is the primary scout stat, so get max of
that whatever you are making out of your scout. PER is the second one to
think about here. Don't get less than 16 per. It's probably wise to get
17 or even 18 as man, since otherwise you will have to get very low
endurance and parry. A common mistake is to think that since scouts have
weapons that have very low strength requirements that strength isnt very
important for a scout. That is dead wrong. As previosuly stated your
strength determines how much you can carry while still sneaking, and
your encumbrance will also greatly determine how many moves it costs to
walk a room, since you have to carry everything and since you will not
ride much.

DEX, PER, STR and CON should be your priorities, probably in that order
too. WIL is also good for wilderness (and spellsave), but not as
important as strength. INT is good for envenom percentage, though at
above 75% you fail almost nothing, and you get over 80% with 19 dex 9
int at max pracs. WIS is the ultimate dump stat for scouts, don't waste
your points here.

Here are a few examples of stats:

`Man (pure)`
`Str:15 Int: 9 Wis: 8 Dex:18 Con:16 Wil:12 Per:17.`

`Elf (higer scout% allows more warrior skills)`
`Str:15 Int: 9 Wis: 8 Dex:19 Con:15 Wil: 9 Per:18.`

`Hobbit (most hps)`
`Str:14 Int: 7 Wis: 8 Dex:19 Con:18 Wil:11 Per:16.`

### Pracs and leveling

Good news: Leveling scout is probably the fastest and easiest class on
mume.

If you are an elf you should start by getting a torch in mandos and
praying to lorien. In lorien spam around until you have enough travel
points for level 10 or so. After that pray to [Grey
Havens](Grey_Havens "wikilink"). At level 1-15 you level by shooting,
and after that by backstabbing.

Both [shoot](shoot "wikilink") and backstab are delayed commands that
are interrupted if you get hit while trying. In order to shoot something
you need a [bow](bow "wikilink") (longbow is better for xp), a quiver
with arrows and preferably the missile skill. Shooting from sneak also
helps both aiming, damage and reliability of your shots, so get max
sneak as soon as you can. When a scout (or anyone else) flees from
combat, they will get nosneak, which is a temporary effect that lasts
for about four seconds, you will see that your prompt will have a
smaller 's' instead of the normal capital 'S', and that means that you
have sneak on, but you have nosneak. There is a skill to counter this
however - the escape skill. Escape lets you flee in a chosen direction,
and lets you keep sneaking afterwards, however it takes time to escape
and escape can also fail (chances are higher with many mobs/players
hitting you). Max missile is 16 pracs, and is taught in lorien. Max
sneak and escape is taught in tharbad. Sneak is 23 pracs, escape is 16.

Scouts have most of their guildmasters in the city of Tharbad. This is a
dangerous place for low level newbies, since the town accepts black
numenorians as citizens, and there are many agressive mobs and hidden
doors that you must know about. I suggest that the first time you want
to visit tharbad ask on narrates for someone to help you get to the
guildmasters.

I suggest you get max missile and sneak in Grey Havens, which is quite
low, but still good enough to level to 10 or 12, around then you should
have saved up enough pracs for you to follow a legend into Tharbad and
get max sneak, high missile and max escape.

Backstab is possible to max out at level 14, but will not work great
until level 18. After that however you only need your bow to finish off
bad/awful mobs. Leveling solo from 18-25 with backstab is very fast.

At level 10 or so you can get 4-5 cure light. At legend get a few pracs
bless. Some scouts get create food and create water too, since it will
allow you to carry less, but i think these spells lower your scout
percentage too much, though it's up to you to decide that.

At legend, or whenever you start to prioritize PK over xp, you will want
to get more warrior skills, so that you have higher hp and ob. Escape is
not nececary in pk, but very useful in some situations, so you can
consider skipping it if you wish to prioritize something else.

Many players will advise you to get 95% awareness. This will give you
limited night vision. You see mobs and get no malus from darkness, but
you don't see room namnes and cant do map room. Some of these players
say that backstabbing is easier with no light on. I have tested this and
found no real difference in stabbing with or without light. Also when
using hide you will automatically cover your light source, so if you
have no night vision and hide in a dark room you wont be able to see/do
anything without revealing your position. There are however ways to
counter this:

Making a camp fire in the room. This is quite obvious if you use hide to
hide from other players that are chasing you, but if they havent seen
you yet they you can still backstab people using this. Seeing lore is a
herb lore that you get from killing the witch near fornost. This also
gives you the same night vision as awareness. Dark helmet is an artifact
helmet that gives you real night vision. I mention this because
awareness is very expensive to practice (27 pracs) and many new players
think it's necessary to have it.

What other skills you want is largely dependant on how you want to pk.
Backstab does about 225 hp with a good weapon at legend. This is more
than half the hp on a warrior or caster, and more than that on a scout.
This means that in order to actually kill someone with backstab you need
to backstab then when they are low, or be able to chase them down
afterwards. Envenom comes in handy here, as there are poisons that do
damage and drain moves. Missile weapons are the most damaging weapons in
the game, if you dont count backstab from daggers. However missile is a
delayed action so people won't stick around until you've shot them dead.
Bash comes in handy here, since you can land four longbow shots in one
bash if you have max missile.

Even though scouts are sneaky and have the ability to backstab, you are
not limited to doing only that. A scout with high ob and hp, or high
defense can win many fights by just hitting his opponent to death with
your dagger. If this is your primarly playstyle, get high endurance, max
attack, max piercing and possibly bash too. Some people make scouts that
have other weapons, such as ornate hammer etc. This is only viable if
you can make a scout character with 18 or more strength, and you will
also have to have a high ob for it to be worth it. This usually means
having quite a high level (40+).

People also think about scouts as solo characters. A scout can
contribute alot to a group both in xp and in pk. A scout can sneak
around and check out how many are on the opposing team, they can sneak
in and only reveal themselves once the door is blocked, creating an
element of surprise, they can poison the weapons of the other group
members, they can shoot bashed targets and do almost the same damage as
a caster, etc. Your possibilities as a group increase by having a scout,
you just need to think a bit! :)

### Equipment

As previously stated for leveling you need a longbow. For pk you might
want to choose a faster shortbow, such as the eleven shortbow or black
horn short bow.

For backstabbing you can use an elven dagger or orkish fang, which if
enchanted does the same damage as the best dagger in the game, which is
the black runed dagger, but it has 5 less ob and 5 less pb. Slender
dagger is an alternative that has slightly lower damage but 5 more ob
than black runed dagger, and 10 more than fang.

Scouts in general carry no armour, except shining chain, though this
doesnt mean you should run around naked. Plain clothes increase your
dodge, and leather gloves increase your ob. Thin, soft leather gloves
are the best, they are +3 ob, and you can get them pretty easy compared
to a ruby ring for instance (which is +5 ob). Get ash arrows rather than
plain arrows, they are lighter and have a small ob bonus. They are
available in lorien and rivendell. Having a decent shield is also
helpful. Other than that just dont carry anything at all. Having light
equipment is very important so dont carry 10 pieces of raw meat around
all the time. 2-3 lembas wafers, a small water container, a light source
and a butcher knife should be your only excess equipment. Having a pale
blue stone, preferably a focused one, and having the traveling lore
and/or orkish draught will aid you greatly when pking at legend.

[\*](Category:Guides "wikilink") [Category:Newbie
Help](Category:Newbie_Help "wikilink")