---
title: "Shaman Guide"
permalink: "/Shaman_Guide/"
---

Shaman Guide by Shaukr v0.9

## Contents

• Introduction: Shamans • Quick Start Guide • Some Basic, Flexible Stats
• Core Shaman Abilities • War Shaman, Pure Shaman, and Extensions

## Introduction: Shamans

Orkish shamans are casters for the Tarkhnarb Orcs, a race which has the
inspiring caster stats of -3 Intelligence, -2 Wisdom -2 Willpower, plus
extremely low base mana regeneration, the inability to cast reliably in
the sun, and a drastically limited list of available spells. Despite
this catalog of negatives, people (including myself) love playing them,
which should be an indication that somehow something is working. Aside
from the underdog aspect, shamans bring a couple of unique tools to the
field which synergize to great effect. They are the support characters
of a pack of raiders, and are also blunt-force spellswords with +2
Strength and +2 Constitution who create openings for their slow,
cumbersome spells with force of arms.

Mechanically, “shaman” is a unique skill class available to Tarkhnarb
Orcs, which comprises both mage and cleric skills. This means that what
would otherwise be a triple-class combo of warrior-cleric-mage is now
just a dual-class, with fewer penalties to each other’s skills caused by
wide cross-classing. Additionally, Tarkhnarb Orcs get a few unique
skills for shamans (raise dead), and more maximum practices in some
spells (such as blind, harm, fear) to compensate for their worse stats.

As this guide cannot cover everything, it is aimed more towards newer
players or those unfamiliar with the class who want to know how to get
started. This guide is going to discuss shamans (both “war shaman” and
“pure shaman”) as combo characters, where the combination in question is
a mix of warrior and shaman. We’ll look at a very simple “quick start”
for players who just want to get out there, and then subsequent guides
will go into greater depth on war shamans and pure shamans,
respectively. This guide also assumes that you have a basic working
knowledge of playing a Tarkhnarb Orc, and the quests and equipment
available to them. You are encouraged to ask players in-game for
details!

Like all combo characters, there is a sliding scale of the weights
applied to each component class: war shamans bring more warrior skills
to the table, while “pure” shamans approach total shamanhood but almost
always retain more warrior skills than a true caster would. Players have
been successful going even further, with characters I would describe
more as caster warriors, thief shamans, or totally pure shamans with no
combo aspects. In general, the design of these characters tends to be
more idiosyncratic and less suited for a general guide. If you are
interested in them, starting with something more basic (as presented
here), figuring out what works, and then designing your own is the way
to go.

General Pros/Cons – Why Shaman?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Pros:**

- Flexible character class that can fill a variety of roles and be
  re-practiced easily into almost completely different classes.
- Reasonably reliable mixing for herblores – you will be mixing draughts
  for everyone.
- Breath of Briskness and draughts offer very high mobility.
- Access to a powerful charmed mob enhances solo and group play.

**Cons:**

- Lower stats and use of spells makes this character crippled by sun.
- Limited mana pool and poor mana regen makes for challenging resource
  management.
- The more spells you use, the more reliant you are on rare equipment.

### Quick Start Guide

Read this section if you just want to get started and aren’t sure what
to do and want directions. Make a Tarkhnarb Orc:

- Use these stats: <nowiki>gStr: 15 Int: 15 Wis: 16 Dex: 11 Con: 15 Wil:
  13 Per: 9.
  </pre>

*You’ll start at 2nd age, with +1 to Str, Int, Dex, Con, Wil, and Per.*
*Train improve strength, train neglect wis. You’ll want to let your
stats train until your strength shows as 18 when typing “inf”, and you
are able to wield an 18 strength weapon with no warning that you are too
weak. At this point, you can train maintain strength, train maintain
wis.* 1. Start your first levels by practicing a small amount of slash,
endurance, and parry. You’ll be using slashing weapons as you don’t yet
have the strength for bigger weapons, but you can change this later. A
good starter weapon is a jagged-edged scimitar, which has +15 ob. You
can kill small mobs around the New Orkish Caves (NOC), and by level 5
you should have invested some points in ride, swim, climb, bandage, and
pick. An alternative weapon option that provides more offense is to
practice two handed weapons and obtain a halberd, which you’ll have the
strength to use immediately. Using the at-bay feature of this weapon
will allow you to solo XP slightly more effectively but leave you more
fragile as you lack a shield.

2\. At level 5, aim to have some basic armor (fine rigid leathers or
fine chains), your sword, black padded boots, and a forest green cloak.
Grab a warg and start exploring! Orkish TPs can be a pain, and you want
to gather a ton while the cost of death is irrelevant. 20k is a good
start, but it’s alright to stop earlier if you’re finding this hard or
uninteresting. A good (and important) added objective on this quest is
to save ~12 practices to level up wilderness at the Old Orkish Caves
(OOC).

3\. If possible, obtain the orkish draught lore (requires a gem – ask
other players online) before your grand adventure, so that you can begin
making your own draughts. Shamans should (and will) always have a stock
of these to boost their mobility.

4\. As you start to level up more diligently using your surplus of TPs,
raise your slash/parry to 50%, endurance to 40%, and round out your
ranger skills (70% climb, swim, and wilderness, max ride, and an early
40% in bandage). XP your character like a weaker warrior, in a group
whenever possible. Warrior and ranger skills can be leveled up as you
level up, while caster skills (coming next) should generally be
practiced all at once – a half-practiced spell is likely to simply
backfire.

5\. Once you have spare practice sessions beyond the basics listed, you
can start picking up spells. armour (max), cure serious (6 practices),
shocking Grasp (max), cure critic (4 practices), breath of briskness (12
practices), remove poison (2 practices), and harm (max) is a simple
order to get each skill, and will take you to hero level (21).

*Why do I suggest certain spells or skills?* Read on to the war shaman
and pure shaman guides for a more in-depth discussion of abilities in
context. The suggestions here are presented unambiguously as something
that will work, but you can easily train off skills and rearrange them
as you discover what works best for you.

6\. As you level up, your equipment consists of a few basics: fine
chainmail armour, a forest green cloak, black padded boots, and a good
light shield (gilded round shield). You can swap out your jagged
scimitar for an engraved broadsword, wightblade, or fell blade, if you
get the chance.

Combat at these levels is generally assisting a buffer and dealing hit
damage in PvE, contributing cures to the buffer and nukes against larger
mobs. Shock deals a decent punch of cheap damage, while harm is useful
on large targets. When (not if) you get involved in PK, use quick shocks
to hit your targets, while trying to avoid being targeted – as casters
usually are. Keep an eye out for enemies that are bashed, as these are
where you should aim a harm. Be proactive about refreshing your armor
spell, especially against enemy casters.

At this point, you have a **decision** to make.

*Do you want to be more like a warrior, and hence swap slashing for a
more powerful weapon class with your trained-up strength?* If so, follow
on to the war shaman guide. You’ll be practicing bash and the shield
spell, leaning into trading hits directly and harming targets that
you’ve bashed. *Alternatively, do you want to lean more into your
magical abilities?* See the pure shaman guide. You’ll pick up blindness,
raise dead and command, shield, and a few other utility spells from this
point, using your summoned mobile to tie down foes for your magical
attacks.

Each guide will talk more about the details of each sub-class, and the
**equipment**/**skill** choices to make.

*Wait, Where Do I Practice?*

The shaman guildmasters are scattered around the map, and all of them
have something useful:

- [Thrakghash of the Mordor
  Flame](Thrakghash_of_the_Mordor_Flame "wikilink") located in West NOC.
  This BN teaches all of the mage spells that orcs have access to.
- [Brolg](Brolg "wikilink") located in his tower south of Rivendell.
  Brolg most notably teaches max breath of briskness and black breath.
- [East Priest](East_Priest "wikilink") located in a temple east of the
  Last Bridge. EPriest has the bulk of the cleric offerings, teaching
  max blind, harm, raise dead, cures, and remove poison.
- [Numenorean Sage](Numenorean_Sage "wikilink") located in the Old Orc
  Caves. Sage teaches utility skills like strength, cure blindness, and
  break door. The command skill for orcs is also maxed in OOC, from
  Gumak, the gatekeeper.

Chances are, you will have some practices from each of these GMs, so
it’s good to visit them all. Many of the cleric skills are taught by
more than one of the above to different levels.

Something to keep in mind: like many combo characters, the goal is no
longer maximizing the power of core abilities! Instead, you will be
balancing the effectiveness of many different skills which will make
other skills harder to practice as well. Don’t expect to have any skills
at superb!

### Benchmark Stats: Basic and Flexible

Given the split of shamans into two somewhat distinct subclasses, the
first set of stats here is highly recommended as it can be practiced
towards either a war shaman or a pure shaman. Each subsequent section
will give examples of more specialized stats, but for a player who isn’t
sure or wants variety, the below stats (used in the quick start) are
effective: <nowiki>gStr: 15 Int: 15 Wis: 16 Dex: 11 Con: 15 Wil: 13 Per:
9

</pre>

- *Train +2str +1con -2wis (or +2str -1.x wis if staying purer)*

All of the stats I suggest will include max intelligence and wisdom, and
at least 15 strength. Intelligence and wisdom are maxed as this gives
you the most possible mana and you’ll want to get your spell skill level
as high as possible given the stat penalties that orcs have. 15
strength, with age and training, means you have freedom to use any
weapon you wish effectively, giving you more combat tools. 13 willpower
is enough to have 90%+ blind when practiced pure, and 84% command, with
reasonable contribution to your other skills. The remaining stats are
fairly free-form, but constitution is often helpful for raw
survivability (especially as a war shaman) while dexterity and
perception play less of a role.

If you’re willing to run slightly lower constitution (especially at
higher levels or with more experience playing orcs), trading some base
constitution for more willpower is useful and adds even more
flexibility:

<nowiki>gStr: 15 Int: 15 Wis: 16 Dex: 10 Con: 14 Wil: 14 Per: 9

</pre>

''Similarly, train +2 strength and train down wisdom, training up
constitution if you want. While slightly more fragile, the higher
willpower gives more power for blind and raise dead.

Train down wisdom because the stat provides less mana than intelligence,
and as a maxed stat you can get a lot of mileage reallocating it to
other stats. You might choose to train down less if you want a larger
mana pool, but you should still aim for raising strength to use your
chosen weapon. In general, suggested war shaman stats will involve
higher base strength and constitution, while suggested pure shaman stats
will trade off base constitution towards higher willpower.''

### Core Shaman Abilities and Some Basics

While skill use will be discussed later, there are a couple of abilities
that are somewhat typical to shamans and should be covered before you go
further.

- Harm. This is the biggest attack spell orcs have, and without access
  to dispel evil or fireball, orcs are the ones who use it most. Harm is
  unique for two reasons.

<!-- -->

- - First, on top of the spell’s damage, it also inflicts a wound on the
    target, giving higher variance to the damage but tremendous
    potential as wounds can cut enemy max hp.

<!-- -->

- - Second, harm cannot reduce an enemy below 1hp – enemies will always
    survive with 1hp, and the spell will outright fail against a foe
    with 1hp. It will, however, kill incapacitated foes.
    - Harm’s power is also a newbie trap. The spell is very expensive
      (25 base mana, 39 when cast quick), and most shamans can cast two
      harms quickly before having no mana left (pure shamans with high
      age can perhaps manage three). It’s all too common to see shamans
      unleash all of their firepower on a target, only to be dead in the
      water with no mana against an enemy with more than half their
      health remaining – a problem less critical for true casters of
      other races who have the mana pool to blast foes to death.
      Effective use of the spell will be discussed in subsequent
      sections.

- Raise Dead. A truly unique spell to orcs, raise dead turns the corpse
  of a sapient creature into an enslaved shadow – a permanently-charmed
  mobile. Shamans may only have one of these mobiles, and their power
  scales with the level of the corpse raised up to a maximum of
  level 21. Shadows of the maximum level can also be converted into a
  dreadful warg in Dol Guldur (ask players in-game for the details of
  how this can be done), an alternative attack-focused mobile for
  shamans. Both mobiles require the command skill to be used to order
  them, and I would recommend maxing command (18 practices for orcs) if
  using raise. Neither mob is inherently aggressive, making them viable
  in group settings.
  - Enslaved shadows are highly defensive, with solid stats and a large
    health pool. They can rescue (but not protect) and are easier to
    command than the warg (might need to send orders multiple times with
    13 willpower, but still workable with less). Shadows leave no
    tracks, have fairly good movement points, and make for strong
    buffers in XP and PK. They can also be ordered to wield weapons,
    though this is rarely used barring niche applications (wield spears
    to ignore enemy at-bay, or a poisoned weapon).
  - Dreadful wargs hit harder than shadows and bash very effectively.
    They are substantially more fragile than shadows and are harder to
    command (13 willpower is perhaps the minimum to use them, 14+ is
    easier). Their moves are extremely good, and they are better suited
    to assisting/bashing than taking hits from enemies.

Raise dead is a superb skill for both XP and PK and does not require
many practices because the created mobiles don’t expire or scale with
the spell. Raise can be cast at full mana and then you can spend time
regenning mana when outside combat so long as the spell is workable
(often 5-8 practices needed to get it under 100 mana, don’t waste
practices raising this much higher). The pure shaman section of the
guide will incorporate this ability more than the war shaman, but
high-level war shamans can also pick up this skill. War Shaman, Pure
Shaman, and Extensions War shamans and pure shamans are nearly distinct
classes in practice, and so there is a separate guide for details on
each. You should read on to the one (or both) that you’re most
interested in playing at levels 21+. Finally, we should briefly touch on
the fact that shaman pures and combos that don’t fit the above
frameworks certainly exist. Caster-warriors, with non-max intelligence
and wisdom and fewer spells in favor of more robust warrior skills and
higher physical stats are one end of the spectrum. Thief shaman combos
are another niche case, where the armour spell covers the weak equipment
absorb and blindness makes backstab more effective. Playing the more
standard combo setups will develop your sense of what you can fit in a
character, what seems to work, what stats matter, and so on. Hence,
starting with the basics listed here will help you get accustomed to
shaman combos and let you design your own characters which suit your
interests. Some examples: Piercing poison pure shaman:
<http://elvenrunes.com/cgi-bin/logs/secure/log_65860,66525_start_30_omode__typ_whine_show.m>
Bolting war-combo:
<http://elvenrunes.com/cgi-bin/logs/secure/show.m?log=60629,51757&mark=>

## War Shaman

Index • Introduction • Stats • Practicing • Leveling Up • Playstyle and
Tactics • Extensions

### Intro

This guide follows the Shaman Basics guide, and assumes that you’ve
either read it, or are familiar with the basics in your own right. If
something seems unclear, check to see if the Basics Guide has mentioned
it. War shaman is the more quintessential combo character of the shaman
family, incorporating robust hitting power with limited spells that are
directly useful for offense/defense rather than support. You can hit and
bash like a warrior and fling nukes like a caster – not as well as
either but finding synergies between the two. Whether it’s trading hits
against a warrior while using armour spell to put you on top or landing
a bash with two quick harms for an instant kill, war shaman has a number
of useful and simple synergies that make it an effective character for
PK and MUME in general. A Quick Overview: <nowiki>gPros: • Simple,
flexible strategies for fights in closeables, in the open, and against a
variety of enemies. • High solo lethality: bash-harm is satisfying and
effective for securing kills. • Relatively low dependence on equipment.
• Bash and nuke give useful tools for a PvE group. Cons: • Limited solo
XP options except at very high level. • Combo ob/defense can perform
poorly against pure warriors in a straight fight.

</pre>

**Stats:** While the baseline stats above are perfectly usable for a war
shaman, you can tune them in various ways if you don’t intend to
re-practice the character. **Examples:** <nowiki>g Str: 16 Int:15 Wis:
16 Dex: 9 Con:16 Wil: 12 Per: 9 \[base\]

</pre>

Train -2 Wis +1 Str +1 Con +2 Dex The above pushes your strength and
constitution a little higher at the cost of dex and wil. Dex can be
reclaimed by training, letting you settle at: <nowiki>gStr: 18 Int: 16
Wis: 14 Dex: 12 Con: 18 Wil: 13 Per: 10 \[2nd age, train\]

</pre>

At level 30, that looks like this:

• 360 hits, 101 mana, 140 moves • OB: 144%, DB: 36%, PB: 14%, Armour:
94% • EQ: Metals, ruby ring, warsword, gleaming belt • \*stats taken
solo in orc caves in 2nd age

Ultimately, you should aim for having enough strength to use your
weapons (i.e. 18) without access to strength spell or a strength ring,
such that you’re less reliant on legend equipment. Your character will
start at 2nd age and should stay in the 2nd/3rd age brackets. A good
time to reset age is when the +1 strength bonus from age is lost, as the
added mana regen isn’t worth the loss of physical stats when going to
4th age and above.

### Practices at Legend – Core Skills, Optional Skills

The core skills to aim for are as follows:

- **Max armour/shield/harm:** These are your core tools. Expect to have
  80%+ in each when fully practiced.

<!-- -->

- **Max secondary attack spell:** See the end of this section for
  discussion.

<!-- -->

- **Cure serious/cure critic/breath of briskness/remove poison/cure
  blind:** All practiced to viable levels. I would suggest 6/4/~70%/2/1
  practices respectively at first.

<!-- -->

- **Sense Life:** 1-2 practices to boost your perceptions, which helps
  when searching for random doors or for seeing scouts. Useful and
  cheap.

<!-- -->

- **Primary weapon skill and bash:** Exactly what you get will depend on
  stats and weapon choice. With smite/concussion, 80/75%. With others,
  75/75% might be more feasible. See the “EQ and Weapon Choice” section
  for discussion on weapon classes to choose. This will likely take 25+
  practices in the weapon skill and 30/35+ bash practices.

<!-- -->

- **Rescue:** 1 practice. You won’t be protecting people, but you can at
  least take over buffing.

<!-- -->

- **Parry:** ~5 practices. This depends on your weapon class and how you
  intend to play. Raising parry higher may make sense if you find
  yourself buffing for XP with a 1-handed weapon more. A baseline of 5
  for a smiter or a fully-aggressive concussion character is sufficient.

<!-- -->

- **Endurance:** ~50%. This can be raised in the future but is a decent
  baseline. The extra health and moves will keep you alive since you’ll
  be trading hits with enemies directly.

<!-- -->

- **Ride, swim, climb, wilderness:** Max ride, and 70% in the rest. I
  would sooner raise wilderness to 80%+ where possible – a large amount
  of shaman play turns into hit-flee and hit-spam as your spells are
  slow, and you don’t have the raw movement stats of a warrior.

<!-- -->

- **Track:** 90%. Find your foes.

<!-- -->

- **Pick:** at least 40%. Open doors. Close doors.

<!-- -->

- **Attack:** 1-2 pracs. Attack, even when not using a piercing weapon,
  will raise your rate of fleeing. As a character with reasonably low
  dex/wil (flee chance success) who will be hit-fleeing, you’ll need
  what you can get.

<!-- -->

- **Search:** 1 prac is sufficient. For randomized doors and hidden
  things.

The choice of a **secondary attack spell** depends somewhat on personal
preference. In general, harm is too slow to use outside of bashed
targets in PK or on mobs. However, you can boost your damage output by
casting after hits or during hit-delay, which also serves to add more
disruption when fighting casters. Your main choices are burning hands,
shocking grasp, and lightning bolt.

- **Burning hands** (11 practices): Burn does approx. 12-24 fire damage
  and is very quick (1s for normal cast, 0.5s for quick cast), for 7
  base mana. Because the casting time is short, you often won’t have to
  cast this spell quickly (though you can do so when needed), which
  saves more mana. Additionally, web and frost mudlle in some areas
  require fire to burn it, making burning hands useful in general. The
  downsides are that this skill doesn’t do that much damage, especially
  against enemy Zaugurz orcs (who are effective against fire) or armies
  of the west who have icy rings. Even if you don’t pick this, having a
  few practices in it for mudlle uses is handy.

<!-- -->

- **Shocking grasp** (11 practices): With approx. 20-40 lightning
  damage, shock hits harder than burning hands at the cost of 9 mana and
  a slower cast (1.5s normal, 1s quick). Few targets resist lightning,
  and the spell is still quick enough to land normal or fast shocks on
  foes during fighting. Overall, this is my preferred choice on war
  shaman.

<!-- -->

- **Lightning Bolt** (16 practices): Approx. 28-55 damage at 11 mana,
  bolt splits its damage between lightning and fire and has the biggest
  punch for orcs besides harm itself. However, I feel that this spell
  underperforms for war shamans for the following reasons.
  - First, most of your casting will be after hitting targets, and an
    engaged unfocused bolt is not terribly quick (1.75s normal, 1.25s
    quick) – meaning when you do use it, it will almost always be
    quick-cast, raising its mana cost substantially (17 mana for quick).
    War shamans don’t have the mana pool to fling a whole lot of quick
    bolts or get a ton of damage out of them.
  - Moreover, if fighting a white-side caster, their bolts will always
    be faster than your bolts due to their focused staff (staffed bolts
    cast at 1.25s normal, 0.75s quick), making this spell of limited
    effectiveness to interrupt them versus what burning hands or shock
    can do. Add that it takes more practices, and I find burning hands
    or shock to be more useful for a war shaman.

If you are interested in using bolt, I would adjust your spell usage
more towards bolt as your primary tool: landing 3 bolts in a bash or
quick bolts whenever possible, and not conserving mana as much for harm
(or dropping harm entirely and practicing more warrior). Some players
may also opt for bandage/cure light over cure critic/cure serious. At
lower %s, cure light can frequently be better healing for mana cost, and
bandage of course costs none. On the other hand, all shaman spells are
grouped together (no issue of mage vs cleric practicing like with the
Armies of the West), cure serious/critic can work with fewer total
practices invested, and they help counterweigh your warrior practices to
keep spell% decent.

### Equipment and Weapon Choice

Weapon choice is largely up to you, and you should feel free to try out
what seems fun. Here are some considerations:

- Smite: Ounce for ounce this is probably the strongest choice.
  Str-Con-Wil are your best weapon stats for getting a high skill %.
  Furthermore, as a combo your attacks are weaker, and so smite’s
  individually larger hits help compensate for that against linear
  elements of armor reduction. \*\*Some of smite’s weaknesses such as
  low defense are compensated somewhat by armour/shield. Additionally,
  re-eq is comparatively simple – grab a mattock and go.
  - - Legend EQ: burnished hewing-spear, war mattock, or great warsword.

<!-- -->

- Concussion: Just as good stat-wise as smite, concussion is amazing vs
  metal targets (i.e. most targets in PK) and allows you to use a shield
  to boost defense and spellsave. However, the best concussion weapon
  (ornate, steel-shafted warhammer) is likely the most difficult weapon
  to replace.
  - Legend EQ: ornate warhammer, max-enchanted heavy morningstar, or
    engraved warhammer.

<!-- -->

- Stabbing: Effective vs riding and at-bay make stabbing a good
  all-around choice, with less pure offensive power than smite but more
  balance overall. Awlpike is a powerful, quick weapon and unlike all
  other options on this list requires only 17 strength, letting you be
  more flexible with training and age. However, fighting in closeables
  on foot in spam where you can’t easily maximize the usage of at-bay
  will leave stabbing often underperforming other weapons. Also,
  dexterity and perception are generally your lowest stats, making skill
  levels lower.
  - Legend EQ: awl-pike, blackened spear (18 str).

<!-- -->

- Cleave: Darkened orkish axe is (relatively) easy to get and hits
  tremendously hard. However, you are locked to -5 ob versus other
  weapon classes (cleave weapons are +15OB), and without any of the
  other useful advantages said classes provide.
  - Legend EQ: darkened orkish axe, mighty dwarven axe.

<!-- -->

- Slashing: Useful for defense, mediocre for offense. Steel claymore
  hits hard, but if you want to hit things dead, use a bigger weapon. It
  can be useful to put in 2-5 practices for buffing if you’ve got
  another primary 1-handed weapon type.
  - Legend EQ: steel claymore, engraved broadsword, fell blade,
    wightblade.

<!-- -->

- Pierce: No. Doesn’t fit your stats, isn’t a warrior skill, and has low
  impact damage.

Aside from weaponry, your basic equipment loadout looks like the
following:

- **Great helm and full fine metal armor** (breastplate, vambraces,
  gauntlets, greaves, boots). You have the strength to wear metal armor,
  the high absorb will help you trade blows, and it’s all simpler to
  replace. Carry spare black padded boots for better mobility on foot.

<!-- -->

- **Gilded round shield** or the best light shield you can find, or else
  wear a metal wall shield. If using smiting weapons, any buckler will
  do for basics.

<!-- -->

- **Forest green cloak**, then upgrade to a grisly, scorched fur. Combos
  suffer for low OB, and so ideally, you’ll want a fur (or imposing,
  golden mantle which is lighter) once you can replace your FGC.
  1-handed war shamans who expect to buff can also carry a fine grey
  cloak.

#### Legend EQ:

- **Gleaming belt** (+mobility),

<!-- -->

- **Ruby ring** (+ob),

<!-- -->

- **Black amulet** (eff vs light),

<!-- -->

- **Old length of iron chain** (eff vs mental).

<!-- -->

- **Bejewelled shield** if 1handed, horsehide buckler if smiting.

<!-- -->

- **Slim silvery wristband** (-moveregen, +manaregen) is superb but
  challenging to obtain.

<!-- -->

- **Opaque or lambent amulet** provide detect magic so that you don’t
  have to practice it.

<!-- -->

- **Strength ring** boosts you to 20 strength and allows you to save
  practices by not getting the spell yourself, but not needed to play
  the character.

#### An example basic equipment loadout – with a legend weapon:

<nowiki>g You are using: <wielded two-handed> a great warsword
(flawless) <worn on forearm> a metal buckler (flawless) <worn on head> a
great helm (flawless) <worn on body> a fine metal breastplate (flawless)
<worn about body> a grisly, scorched fur (flawless) <worn on arms> a
fine pair of metal vambraces (flawless) <worn on hands> a fine pair of
metal gauntlets (flawless) <worn on legs> a fine pair of metal greaves
(flawless) <worn on feet> a fine pair of metal boots (flawless)
<worn on wrist> a keyring with a couple of keys and a set of lock picks
<worn on finger> a ring <worn on back> a leather backpack <worn as belt>
a leather belt <worn on belt> a butcher knife (flawless) <worn on belt>
a water skin <worn on belt> a herbal kit <worn on belt> a stone

</pre>

An example max set, with some artifacts and rare items: <nowiki>g You
are using: <wielded two-handed> a burnished hewing-spear (flawless)
<worn on forearm> the black buckler (flawless) <worn on head> a crown of
bones (flawless) <worn on body> a shining breastplate (flawless)
<worn about body> an imposing, golden mantle (flawless) <worn on arms> a
shining pair of vambraces (flawless) <worn on hands> a black pair of
metal gauntlets (flawless) <worn on legs> a shining pair of greaves
(flawless) <worn on feet> a black pair of metal boots (flawless)
<worn around neck> an old length of iron chain <worn around neck> a
black amulet <worn on wrist> a keyring with a couple of keys and a set
of lock picks <worn on wrist> a slim silvery wristband (flawless)
<worn on finger> a ruby ring <worn on finger> a root ring <worn on back>
a silvan satchel <worn as belt> a gleaming belt <worn on belt> a
gem-inlaid knife (flawless) <worn on belt> a sable pouch <worn on belt>
a water skin <worn on belt> a stone <worn on belt> an enhanced herbal
kit

</pre>

#### Alternative items:

- **Mana ring.** Orc mana regen is outright awful, and this compensates
  for that to some degree. On the other hand, your spells tend to
  support your hit power, and ruby ring directly benefits the latter
  during battles themselves as well as compensating for limited combo
  OB.

<!-- -->

- **Copper ring.** Extra spellpower is useful, but with zero pass/fail
  spells, it’s not as critical to do a little more harm damage as it
  might be for a caster who needs to not fail a blind.

<!-- -->

- **Twisted crown.** See copper ring, above. Additionally, for someone
  trading hits, the more comprehensive absorb is often better,
  especially with MUME attacks targeting exposed body parts.

<!-- -->

- **Shining chains** over fine metals. Shining chains are lighter, can
  absorb a higher total max damage (14 vs 13), are not punished by
  concussion/blunt weapons, and have smaller penalties to combat stats.
  On the other hand, they absorb a smaller amount of attack damage up to
  the cap (55% vs 90%) meaning you take more chip damage. These are also
  more of a challenge to repair for orcs.

*NOTE:* that as a max-wis orc, you should be sure you have a herbal kit
(enhanced, if possible) and collect ingredients for orkish draughts.
Keep 8-10 on your person with ingredients for more, and don’t be shy
about using them to boost your mobility as you can easily replace them.

### Leveling Up

The snaga life. Coming out of Halls the first time, the same general
guidance for leveling any orc applies: grab some quick levels in NOC,
get your ranger basics (swim/climb/ride) and get out in the world to get
TPs (20k at level 5 will see you almost all the way to hero)!
Subsequently, you should level your character like a warrior. Your spell
power will take a while to catch up, and it’s entirely okay to not grab
any spells until the teen levels, while having early endurance, weapon
skills, and even bash will make you more useful. Grab cures when you
can, though.

In general, your solo XP power is limited – you’re a worse warrior for
now. Being a back-up hitter for a group of XPers is the path of least
resistance, and this will largely hold true for all XP you do in this
class. A suit of decent armor and an enchanted weapon will let you kill
solo mobs slowly but steadily.

Be sure to ask for help in getting draught lore and gather ingredients
when you can. Early access to flasks will greatly help your TP quest and
having them on hand is a habit you should maintain.

Getting bigger. Into the teen levels you can begin filling out your
spell list, assuming you’ve already picked up the warrior skills that
you want. Start by maxing armour, your secondary attack spell, picking
up breath of briskness and your cures, and then finally grabbing shield
and harm. These can be done even into the hero levels.

Hero+. Now you can finish your spells and round off warrior and ranger
percentages to where you want them. Having harm maxed will give you more
punch in case of PK, and so I would get this sooner rather than later.
The penalty from sun is less pressing now, so you can gather more TPs
for your higher levels.

### Playstyle and Tactics

The general loop for war shamans isn’t complex: keep armor and shield up
(and strength, if you have a ring or supporter who can cast it), and try
to keep your mana mostly full to get better regeneration and be ready
for battle. Travel with bob up to burn fewer moves where possible. This
guide isn’t about “fights and how to find them,” but we’ll cover some of
what to do when the battle is ongoing.

Your tools are all dramatically weaker in the sun, which will add a
chance that your spells simply fail (and it will make them weaker in
general). Simple guidance: avoid fighting in sun. And if you have to ask
when to break this rule, you aren’t ready to break it. Dark draughts (a
herblore which loads in Emyn-nu-Fuin) provide a way to circumvent the
penalty of sun, but that is out of the scope of this guide.

When not in PK, your tools are self-explanatory. Hit and bash, and
against large mobs and smobs, normal harms are your added nuke. This
goes without saying, but harm is a less efficient nuke than other spells
available to non-orcs due to its high mana cost and no bonus
effectiveness against targets, and you will only be able to cast 4 (5 if
high-age, fancy items, etc), so treat yourself as half a nuker when
considering what your group has available.

Next, on harm. There are two common uses for harm that are highly
effective in PK:

- Bash <target> – flee – return – cast normal ‘harm’ <target>
  - Landing a bash and fleeing to cast a disengaged (and hence faster)
    harm provides an extremely mana-efficient burst of damage against
    your enemy that makes every bash devastating.
- Bash <target> – flee – return – cast quick ‘harm’ <target> x2
  - Two quick harms are the most you can fit into a single bash, and it
    will devour almost your entire mana pool. However, if this amount of
    damage is sufficient to end the fight, that’s what you should do.
  - This is also the better usage when a target is bashed in a larger
    fight/trap/skirmish and the goal is to lock down a kill immediately
    that might otherwise escape.

If you are not directly engaged, i.e., you are assisting a groupmate,
you can simply “escape” to instantly disengage and cast your harm (one
normal or two quick) without fleeing. In a one-room closeable, closing
the door until your groupmate can bash the target, then dropping two
harms is a common tactic. The key takeaways are that casting harm
disengaged is always better, when possible, due to its lack of speed,
and that because mana efficiency matters a lot more than it does for a
white-side caster with a staff.

The former usage is most effective when in a committed fight (i.e., 1v1
or 2v2 in a locked arena) and you need to make your mana count, while
the latter is useful in the open when you need to secure a kill
outright. Finally, you can land a normal harm or two quick harms while
engaged on a bashed target without fleeing, but rarely is this better
than fleeing, returning, and landing the spell (and subsequent melee
hits) more quickly.

In the latter case, the concept is to wait until the target is within
the range where 2 harms will bring them to 1hp (or near it), and then
look to land a bash so that they can be instantly killed without a
chance to run away. Given that most foes will try to retreat at low
health, bash-harm is an incredible tool to catch someone dead before
they have a chance to flee. Remember that harm cannot incapacitate a
target, so you need to be able to land a final blow!

When engaging in a skirmish (i.e., jumping enemies or being jumped such
that it isn’t a clear committed battle from both sides) you will often
feel like a bootleg warrior. Embrace it. Set spells to quick or fast,
and hit <target>; c <secondary spell> <target>. Landing hit-casts can
deal a large amount of damage quickly, letting you bring down targets
before they can organize or punish a single target until they’re on the
defensive. Bashed targets are an invitation to land a harm. Play
aggressive, but keep your wimpy relatively high as shamans are often
targeted by enemies and the damage reduction of armour spell can make
you feel more durable than you actually are. A hurt shaman whose armour
drops can die in a few spells – do not forget that you are not actually
a warrior.

In committed battles (duels or otherwise), play like a warrior, using
and refreshing armour spell to trade favorable melee hits against your
opponent. Your secondary spell can be used after a hit to add more
damage or to interrupt retaliatory spells (vs casters). The same holds
against thieves, who fare poorly when piercing against the damage
reduction of your metals and armour. Hitting and lining up a shock or
bash will often catch them mid-escape, and once they begin fleeing they
can be punished while unable to sneak. Playing too defensive will allow
thieves to make use of sneak-shoot, where crossbow anti-metal damage
will begin to hurt.

As discussed above, landing bashes is an opportunity to either re-armour
or to land a harm. When fighting casters, hit-flee and try to keep track
of how much damage you’ve landed – a caster with thin or dropped armor
will almost instantly die if harmed twice, and so getting an enemy mage
to high hurt hps, bashing, and landing 2 quick harms will often simply
end a fight in your favor. Against warriors, hitting and casting small
spells during their weapon delay will generally put you ahead, though
high-level warriors can exploit your lower combo-character OB and make
it hard to damage them. In such cases, attempting to land a bash or
going wimpy (if not a smiter) to cast spells more aggressively can
provide options.

Examples: • Vs caster with charmies:
<http://elvenrunes.com/cgi-bin/logs/secure/log_65511,31796_start_30_omode__typ_pk_show.m>
• Vs war-combo:
<http://elvenrunes.com/cgi-bin/logs/secure/mumps?rou=show&log=62943,39153>

### High-level Extensions and Alternate Skills

When continuing to higher levels (40+), there are a few things you can
add besides simply tuning up your warrior skills:

- **Raise dead/command:** Give yourself access to an extremely durable
  charmed mobile (enslaved shadow) which empowers both PK and launches
  your character to an effective solo XPer. You only need enough raise
  dead for it to be castable (5-8 practices). This may be challenging in
  PK for willpower \<13 because command will be 80% or lower, but for
  more balanced stats it’s a powerful tool. Kill a single level 21+ mob
  (Olog-hai, Thrakghash) using harm-flee tactics, raise it, and off you
  go!
  - I would prefer to use the shadow plus your own hitting power and
    bash rather than using a dreadful warg. The dreadful warg is harder
    to command, and while it has more firepower, it is also much more
    fragile. The enslaved shadow can do more to interfere with enemy
    charmies or warrior hits and is challenging for foes to pick off in
    a battle.

<!-- -->

- **Word of recall:** You’ll rarely use this, but the times you do, it
  will be to save your life. When cast, you’ll be sent to a safe place
  nearby, which can get you out of closeables or leave dead ends in your
  tracks. Note that this is hard to cast and casts slow, so you’ll want
  enough % to get near minimum mana.

<!-- -->

- **Envenom:** Adding more power instead to your physical combat skills,
  envenom can cripple enemies (you’ll want to look up the various
  effective poisons). Note that this can only be applied to edged
  weapons (nothing that gets eff vs metal from being blunt). Aim for
  50%+ in the skill.

<!-- -->

- **Escape:** At ~30% this skill won’t do much for escaping from fights,
  but a secondary effect of the skill is reducing the delay when an ally
  rescues you. If you often play in groups, this can be quite valuable.

<!-- -->

- **Earthquake:** An AoE tool to battle groups of enemies, earthquake
  can be used un-stored (quickly or normal) to either initiate attacks
  on groups or defensively pre-cast when being pursued. Being un-stored,
  it can be challenging to land offensively unless enemies are otherwise
  occupied and often relies on sudden opportunity, which can frequently
  hit your unsuspecting allies. Defensively, it is rarely expected as it
  is an uncommon choice and so foes will charge straight into it. On the
  other hand, having this spell in your repertoire encourages you to try
  to land it, which can diminish how effectively you are using your main
  skills as you commit to trying to roll the dice.

Closing: Why are you still here? Go bash some elves dead.

## Pure Shaman

Index • Introduction • Stats • Practicing • Leveling Up • Playstyle and
Tactics • Extensions

### Introduction

This guide follows the Shaman Basics and War Shaman guides, and assumes
that you’ve either read them, or are familiar with the basics in your
own right. If something seems unclear, check to see if the other guides
have mentioned it.

Pure shamans scale down their warrior practices – including usually
giving up bash – for better total spell power and access to more
specialized spells. Your role shifts more to one of support, with access
to key utility spells (darken, blind, break door). While perhaps a less
powerful class in solo PK, raise dead and the dreadful warg provide the
physical offense to back up your spells that you need, while your
powerful armour and shield spells make you difficult to crack.

Owing to the +2 bonus to strength that orcs have, it is still worthwhile
to wield a “serious” weapon to provide hitting power, be it when
buffing, spamming at fleeing elves, or assist-hitting in a group. This
is still somewhat of a combo class and allows flexibility in what type
of weapon class you might want to wield. However, you should no longer
be the one taking the brunt of the damage, as a big feature of being the
one trading blows with enemies is that it makes it terribly hard to cast
support skills and utilize your mana pool!

**A Quick Overview:**

**Pros:**

- Powerful utility spells make this a superb support character for group
  XP/smobbing and a toolkit for various situations.

<!-- -->

- Raise dead with high command is tremendously powerful in both XP and
  PK when solo or grouped, providing either a buffer or basher mobile.

**Cons:**

- Reliance on spells is hindered badly by limited mana pool and regen.

<!-- -->

- Limited physical offense means non-spell tools are external to the
  character itself (extra equipment, or shadow/warg, which can be
  killed/lost).

<!-- -->

- Often targeted in PK with weaker tools to directly hit back compared
  to a war shaman.

### Stats

The primary difference between pure and war shaman is that willpower
becomes much more of a feature, as it plays into skills such as
blindness, command, and break door. By contrast, raw health is less
important as your armour spell is stronger and you are no longer aiming
to physically beat your foes to death. As such, one example of stats
would be: <nowiki>gStr: 15 Int: 15 Wis: 16 Dex: 9 Con: 12 Wil: 15 Per: 9

</pre>

- Train +2 strength from wisdom unless you plan on practicing the
  strength spell.

Like a war shaman, we train down wisdom to obtain 17 strength (18 with
2nd or 3rd age), but we’ve now got 15 willpower. This allows for
Excellent (90%+) command. Low dexterity is concerning at a glance, but
willpower also feeds into flee success. Because the template for what a
pure shaman might practice is less specific, there isn’t as simple a
look at what a legend-level shaman stats will look like, but one could
expect:

- 290 hits, 110 mana, 122 moves
- **OB:** 130%, **DB:** 53%, **PB:** 31%, **Armour:** 75%
- **EQ:** blackened spear, bejewelled shield, shining chain, mana ring,
  gleaming belt

For new legend, assume closer to 275 hps, and closer to 250 hps if using
more “pure” stats with lower con stats taken from Shaukr, level 50,
Dunland, using first Benchmark stats in 4th age with +1str +1con -1wis
trained

Some pure shaman players may opt to go entirely pure, eschewing strength
(and taking fewer warrior practices) altogether and taking max willpower
instead. This is viable but exacerbates the weaknesses of the class –
without any hit power, losing your raised mobile dramatically decreases
your ability to fight things unless you operate in a group.

Example stats: <nowiki>gStr: 12 Int: 15 Wis: 16 Dex: 10 Con: 12 Wil: 16
Per: 9

</pre>

Limited or no training.

Most of this section will discuss the former stats, with some mention of
the purer-than-pure shaman build.

Unlike war shaman, there is also now more value in letting yourself go
past 3rd age. 4th age will boost your mana and mana regen, at the cost
of the +1 strength that 2nd and 3rd age provide. Hence, you may want to
use both training and strength spell to be sure you have 18 strength at
4th age in cases when you lack access to a strength ring, use lower-str
weapons, or accept the partial penalty.

### Practices at Legend – Core Skills, Optional Skills

The core skills for a pure shaman are roughly:

- **Amour/shield/harm:** Max them. These are your key defensive and
  offensive spells, which is detailed above. You should have 90%+ in
  each of these.

<!-- -->

- **Blindness:** you should have this maxed at 90%+. Key utility skill
  for xp, smobbing, and for situational uses in PK.

<!-- -->

- **Secondary attack spell:** Maxed. Most of the discussion in the war
  shaman section applies, but lightning bolt may become a better choice
  if your training/age/equipment leaves you with a higher total mana
  pool and you spend more time casting disengaged in battle.

<!-- -->

- **Cure serious:** (4-6)/cure critic (2-4)/cure blindness (1)/remove
  poison (2)/breath of briskness (70-80%).

<!-- -->

- **Sense Life:** 1-2 practices to boost your perceptions, which helps
  when searching for random doors or for seeing scouts. Useful and
  cheap.

<!-- -->

- **Command:** Max at 18 practices.

<!-- -->

- **Raise Dead:** to a workable level of 80-100 mana (often 5-8
  practices).

<!-- -->

- **Swim, climb and wilderness**: Get all to 70%.

<!-- -->

- **Ride:** Max. You need the mobility.

<!-- -->

- **Track**: 90%+. Don’t play without track.

<!-- -->

- **Primary weapon skill:** Prac to 50-70%. This depends greatly on how
  pure you want to be, and what weapon skill you choose.

<!-- -->

- **Endurance/parry:** Get to 40-50% for your survivability.

<!-- -->

- **Rescue:** put in 1 practice for those times when you need to rescue.

<!-- -->

- **Pick:** 40% at least. Open and close doors.

<!-- -->

- **Attack:** 1-2 pracs. Same justification as for war shaman.

<!-- -->

- **Search:** 1 practice is sufficient for randomized doors and hidden
  things.

<!-- -->

- **Escape:** Optional, but you may want 2-4 pracs (20-30%) to reduce
  the delay when you are rescued, especially if you are using a shadow
  frequently.

<!-- -->

- **Missile:** Some shamans might practice a small amount of missile to
  shoot blind targets in xp/smobbing. This is not a requirement and is
  up to you. In general, using these practices on a melee weapon is more
  useful in more situations.

As an aside, it is challenging to fit both bash and blind in the same
orkish character, in part due to the diminished specialization on each
(which reduces reliability), but also due to how many practices are
needed. Additionally, it’s a bit more questionable how these synergize:
if you’re supporting with blind, you can also bring a dreadful warg to
bash, and if you’re the one bashing targets you’re probably better off
hitting them with more OB, too. It is, however, possible – if you’re
willing to give up some other spells – to obtain 70%+ weaponskill/bash
and 80%+ blindness. This allows you to do a bit of everything, leaning
on the spell boosts of twisted crown and the coarse robe to compensate
for the weaker blindness level.

Many of the other skills are a bit more mix and match. Below, I discuss
other common shaman spell choices:

- **Strength:** 8 practices for +2 strength is quite useful, especially
  as it implies that you do not need to train your strength at all to
  wield a heavy weapon (which in turn means more maximum mana from
  wisdom). On the other hand, this creates another spell which must be
  maintained, a potential drag on your mana and combat readiness. Having
  a higher mana pool and a mana ring can compensate for this upkeep
  cost.

<!-- -->

- **Earthquake:** The great AoE spell. This can be useful in XP (go
  wimpy and quake blind mobs) or in PK, defensively when targeted.
  Without store or a staff, this is rarely useful offensively on shaman,
  but can be a powerful tool in a battle where one or more foes are
  trying to chase you down. Note that having to use it defensively means
  using it based on opportunity rather than in a chosen room as a stored
  spell, making it more likely you can hit allies too. It’s
  situationally useful.

<!-- -->

- **Darken:** Blocks out the sun in a small, 1-2 room radius, and
  removes the penalty of the sun for orcs (and trolls). Note that you’ll
  still have trouble casting this if you’re already currently in the
  sun. Very useful, get a few practices in it if chosen.

<!-- -->

- **Break door:** Destroys most doors outright, including some that
  cannot be bashed. Also provides a high chance of unblocking a blocked
  door, but keep in mind that maxed block door from a white-side caster
  is incredibly reliable and can still resist your break. Very useful.
  Max it if you get it (80%+).

<!-- -->

- **Word of recall:** See discussion in the war shaman extensions. Can
  be useful.

And some uncommon spell choices:

- **Fear:** All ungrouped entities in the room are affected, and face
  one of four outcomes. 1) nothing, 2) forced to flee from the room in
  fear, 3) “collapse”, which deals ~50 damage, or 4) a fatal heart
  attack (no XP for kills this way). This can be very powerful for
  thinning out a large group of mobs when XPing, or for an AoE attack
  that does not hurt your own group in PK. However, its actual
  effectiveness is unreliable at best, irrelevant at worst, though it
  does have a decent effect on enemy mounts! Note that the coarse robe
  boosts both blindness and this spell.

<!-- -->

- **Black breath:** This spell maxes at a tremendous 35 practices and
  has a potentially massive effect in turn. When cast on a target, this
  spell will drain moves and mana from the target and all ungrouped
  entities in the room and give moves back to the caster, with less
  taken from the non-targeted entities. When “successful”, the amount is
  around 50% of the first target’s mana and moves, and otherwise drains
  a smaller amount. This is one of the most devastating ways to attack
  the mobility of a target and can also be used in place of breath of
  briskness by draining random groups of mobs to top up moves. However,
  the spell is expensive and slow (often requiring a lucky quick cast in
  a large battle or a bashed target), can be resisted, and its effect is
  highly variable in larger battles. If you practice it, aim for as
  close to 90%+ as possible. This usually means giving up other major
  spells.

<!-- -->

- **Breath of briskness:** is the easiest choice of spell to drop for
  the practices needed, as black breath can be used in rooms with groups
  of non-aggressive mobiles to top up your mana, at the cost of needing
  to find said groups and losing group support. You might also decide to
  drop harm, as black breath will become your choice of cast-on-bash
  spell. You can pick up lightning bolt as an all-around attack spell
  instead.

<!-- -->

- **Control weather:** Extremely niche uses such as preparing lightning
  for BNs (who only get call lightning and not control weather, while
  orcs do not get call lightning at all) or messing up enemy weather
  setups.

Some spells (poison, hold, energy drain) are currently functionally
useless and should not be practiced.

### Equipment and Weapon Choice

Like war shaman, weapon choice is up to the player, but there are now
some alternative considerations to a few:

- **Stabbing:** Awlpike is the only serious legend offensive weapon that
  requires 17 (instead of 18) strength, which means with 15 base
  strength and either trained +2 or strength spell +2, you can
  comfortably be in 4th age and reap the mana advantages of age without
  sacrificing offense. Additionally, being more of a caster makes you
  more likely to be targeted, which puts a premium on spears’ ability to
  keep enemies at bay.

<!-- -->

- **Slashing:** Less of your damage and effectiveness will come from
  your physical attacks, and that makes more defensive weapons more
  relatively useful. If going fully pure with lower strength, slashing
  with engraved broadsword (or fell blade for offense, if you can get
  one) is the simple way to go.

<!-- -->

- **Smiting:** Giving up your defense in favor of more hitpower is now
  no longer as useful, and hence this weapon class is a much lower
  recommendation for a pure shaman.

<!-- -->

- **Pierce:** Still no. There are some thief-shaman combos that do use
  pierce, but they’re outside the scope of this guide.

#### Basic EQ

- **Fine chainmails** for armor, possibly with fine metal gauntlets and
  boots. Spare black padded boots to swap to for mobility.

<!-- -->

- **Forest green cloak** to be replaced by a grisly, scorched fur or
  imposing, golden mantle when possible. Wear the appropriate cloak when
  hitting/playing offensively or on the defense, where you can use a
  fine grey cloak to stack on to your already-solid dodge bonus.

<!-- -->

- **Gilded round shield** or the best light shield you can find.

An example of a simple set with a legend weapon: <nowiki>g You are
using: <wielded> a narrow runed awlpike (flawless) <worn as shield> a
gilded round shield (flawless) <worn on head> a fine chain mail coif
(flawless) <worn on body> a coarse dusky robe (flawless)
<worn about body> a ragged, blackened cloak (flawless) <worn on arms> a
fine pair of chain mail sleeves (flawless) <worn on hands> a fine pair
of metal gauntlets (flawless) <worn on legs> a fine pair of chain mail
leggings (flawless) <worn on feet> a fine pair of metal boots (flawless)
<worn on wrist> a keyring with a key and a set of lock picks
<worn on finger> a ring <worn on back> a leather backpack <worn as belt>
a leather belt <worn on belt> a butcher knife (flawless) <worn on belt>
a water skin <worn on belt> a herbal kit <worn on belt> a stone

</pre>

#### Legend EQ

- **Coarse dusky robe.** This item has no absorb but provides +20 spell
  attack (2 real levels’ worth) to blindness and fear. This is crucial
  for making your blinds stick, especially against players. Either wear
  this constantly or make aliases to swap it with other armor.

<!-- -->

- **Twisted crown.** Unlike war shaman, you now have spells that are
  pass/fail, and increasing your spell power increases the reliability
  of your conditional spells working at all. Replace your helm and leave
  this on.

<!-- -->

- **Ashen blade.** Regardless of your primary weapon choice, this
  evil-only slashing weapon can be swapped to on the fly, giving +5
  spell attack and is valuable for getting even more out of your spells.

<!-- -->

- **Mana ring.** Orkish regen is painfully low, and this will help
  substantially.

<!-- -->

- **Shining chainmail.** You want the lower weight, and the better
  absorb.

<!-- -->

- **Slim silvery wristband.** When obtainable (only via pk), this adds
  even more mana regen.

<!-- -->

- The usual legend kit:

<!-- -->

- - **Bejewelled shield**

<!-- -->

- - **Gleaming belt**

<!-- -->

- - **Black amulet**

<!-- -->

- - **Old length of iron chain**

<!-- -->

- - **A strength ring** can either provide strength if you don’t have
    the spell or replace the need to cast the spell if you do have it.

<!-- -->

- - **Opaque or lambent amulet** provides detect magic so that you don’t
    have to practice it.

*NOTE:* Pure shaman is more reliant on equipment than war shaman as it
relies on more items to boost its spells, and thus is more sensitive to
losing equipment. Keep this in mind. While pure shamans can more easily
collect gold for re-equipment, it is also more necessary to do so. The
most crucial item is the coarse robe, without which blindness becomes
somewhat unreliable in PK (and an unreliable spell is one that often
isn’t worth the casting time, unless you know your foe is vulnerable).
For PvE, your character will still be functional without legend items,
but you will notice a quick drop-off in blind effectiveness without the
robe and crown.

<nowiki>g An example legend equipment loadout: You are using: <wielded>
a narrow runed awlpike (flawless) <worn as shield> a bejewelled shield
(flawless) <worn on head> a twisted crown <worn on body> a coarse dusky
robe (flawless) <worn about body> an imposing, golden mantle (flawless)
<worn on arms> a shining pair of chain mail sleeves (flawless)
<worn on hands> a fine pair of metal gauntlets (flawless) <worn on legs>
a shining pair of chain mail leggings (flawless) <worn on feet> a fine
pair of metal boots (flawless) <worn around neck> a black amulet
<worn around neck> an old length of iron chain <worn on wrist> a keyring
with a key and a set of lock picks <worn on wrist> a slim silvery
wristband (flawless) <worn on finger> a ring <worn on finger> a golden
ruby ring <worn on back> a leather backpack <worn as belt> a gleaming
belt <worn on belt> a gem-inlaid knife (flawless) <worn on belt> a water
skin <worn on belt> an enhanced herbal kit <worn on belt> a sable pouch
<worn on belt> a stone

</pre>

#### Alternative items

- **Copper ring.** The boost in spellpower can be useful for critical
  blinds or battles. Overall, balancing orkish mana regen makes mana
  ring the more core item.

<!-- -->

- **Tarnished copper wristband.** Only obtainable via PK, this can
  replace slim silvery to provide -5 moves, but +10 mana (if leather
  sleeves, else +5 with chain sleeves).

<!-- -->

- **Pitch black robe.** Corrupted from a pure white robe, this item
  returns part of the mana cost of specific spells (smother, curse,
  black breath, harm, darkness, energy drain, and enchant) approximately
  30 seconds after casting them. Given the large costs of harm and black
  breath, this item can be very powerful in extending your limited mana
  pool.

*NOTE:* that a max-equipped shaman will have almost no equipment-based
absorb: twisted crown, coarse robe, and tarnished copper wristband
(hence leather sleeves) leave the shaman fairly exposed. Setting up many
aliases to swap equipment is one possibility, while another is to use
your (relatively) high skill level in armour and shield to raise your
defense and absorb damage magically. Since hits tend to target unarmored
spots, you might decide to wear fine leather gloves and padded boots as
well in the latter case, since hits are rarely going to land on the few
bits of armor you wear and the lower weight will help defense and
mobility.

### Leveling up

**Snaga.** This is mostly the same as with war shamans – you’ll want to
grab your exploration skills (ride/swim/climb, some endurance,
wilderness) and go TPing. It is still useful to get a few warrior skills
for leveling up early on. Blind at low level is not terribly effective,
but it does enhance your options if you are solo. Get some fine
chainmails and a decent weapon: your lower physical stats and practices
make metals more prohibitive.

**Mid-low-levels.** You’ll benefit tremendously from having a group
because these levels will be slow. Blind and shoot give you one option
for killing large solo mobs, as well as blind and earthquake. Take the
opportunity to make some friends and play in a group – just offer to BoB
them around. This section looks short, and it is, because leveling as a
low-level pure shaman is a reasonably unpleasant experience.

**Hero+.** At this point you have blind maxed, and you have access to
raise dead and max command. Setting the shadow to buff, plus your shaman
blinding and assisting will allow you to freakishly powerlevel.
Mirkwood, Central Anduin, and Dol Guldur are easy areas to rip through
with this setup, but you aren’t constrained and can go just about
anywhere and XP well. If your setup is more defensive, you can use the
dreadful warg to assist you and bash instead, but either way, you should
be able to progress swiftly to legend and beyond. • It will be useful to
learn which mobs are both level 21+ and easy to kill in various areas,
in case you lose your raised mobile. Obvious choices around NOC are
Thrakghash (dies in some harm-fleeing, doesn’t get you wanted in NOC) or
olog-hai NW of crack behind crevices. Another tool – once your defense
(especially armour spell) is fairly healthy – is to make use of
earthquake. Areas such as the Dunland orkish caves can be cleared out by
pre-casting earthquake as hostile packs of mobs chase you into the room.
Usually, this doesn’t compare to using raise dead, but it’s another
tool. Finally, at this point having access to raise and blind means you
can freely kill any mob inside NOC. Shopkeepers, Guildmasters,
Gatekeepers, Takhr, and the Great Goblin will banish you if you attack
them but won’t do this if blind – meaning you can freely kill everyone,
one mob at a time, reaping an easy harvest of experience and loot. Pure
shamans often act as gold suppliers, being able to easily and freely
raise money. • The Great Goblin won’t chase into Harkz’s legendhome (2E
S E from GG), so if you fail a blind and he begins to chase, retreat
here. • If you mess up and get wanted, someone has to kill the Great
Goblin to reinstate your citizenship. Mobs will chase you throughout
NOC, so don’t stick around too long. Alternative rent spots are
available at DT (if dark) and OOC.

### Playstyle and Tactics

Combat as a pure shaman depends first on whether you are in a group, or
solo. When solo, the class relies heavily on their raised mob to support
their limited physical offense and create opportunities to bring spells
to bear. Without this mobile, a pure shaman is at a substantial
disadvantage. In a group, your role is to stay alive (as you will often
be targeted, so keep your armour up) and provide support, be that
blinding charmies/enemy non-casters, spamming spells on enemy casters to
keep them out of the picture, and/or landing offensive spells on the
targeted enemy where possible. The choice between enslaved shadow and
dreadful warg depends somewhat on playstyle. The shadow can rescue you,
buffs much better, but has less offense. It’s often better for XP for
this reason, but it has merits in PK where it can be used to tie down
enemy charmies or warriors without immediate worries about it dying.
Enemies engaged with the shadow are therefore vulnerable for you to cast
on. The shadow leaves no tracks, and this allows additional tactical
advantages: while everyone will know exactly what type of character you
are when they see the dreadful warg tracks.

The warg, on the other hand, can hit substantially harder and bash
enemies for nuking or tactical advantage (as players use the boar or
lithe mobs). But the warg is more fragile, can be killed by enemies who
target it, and can’t buff enemy charmies for long. Hitting the enemy and
ordering the warg to assist/bash exploits parry split and your own
higher defense to keep the warg in battle longer. The notes on bash-harm
presented in the war shaman section apply equally so here, and so the
warg has a distinct advantage in enabling quick harm kills. Enemies
facing you will often target the warg to try to disarm you, and so you
may need to throw yourself somewhat in the threat’s way.

A common experience for shamans, pure or otherwise, is that in a spammy
fight, it’s hard to land spells, and as many pure shaman battles are
teamfights, spamminess is the order of the day. The result is that
you’ll revert to playing a bootleg warrior – spamming hit <target>,
bottlenecking foes, and landing fast or quick spells when the battle
allows. This often means your moves become a problem (put spare
practices towards wilderness, and use breath of briskness and orkish
draughts), and it can also lead to spamming yourself into the grave with
a character not suited for trading hits. Having a dreadful warg to land
bashes and hit hard ameliorates this problem, and to a degree, so does
setting up a pure shaman to use real weapons.

A core power of the pure shaman is its quite reliable **blindness**
spell. With coarse robe, you can consistently blind (even quick blind)
enemy charmies, helping to take them out of the fight entirely, and even
enemy players at times. Using your enslaved shadow or groupmates to buff
charmies so they can be quickly blinded is an excellent way to handle
casters relying on charmed mobs. Against players, however, keep in mind
the limitations of the spell. The wide usage of MMapper means that
blinded players can still navigate freely and will have no trouble
continuing to run away. On the other hand, blinding enemies in a
committed teamfight can knock them out entirely – assuming they don’t
have access to cure blindness. And many will.

Many of the anti-class tools work the same as for war shamans when
considering the added power of the dreadful warg – the threat of its
quick bash will force enemies to play cautiously against you. Keep your
armour refreshed and hit <target> – order assist – order bash – cast if
enemy is in weapon delay will give your warg parrysplit for its damage
while letting your armour spell soak up the enemy hit. Against warriors
and thieves, you may also look to land blinds. Note that against
casters, aggressive play with the warg is likely to get you hit with
earthquake, and so it pays to not be single-mindedly aggressive. On the
other hand, overenthusiastic quaking may lead to the caster being bashed
regardless (especially in rooms with few exits where their flees may
fail), opening them to your Harm spell.

With the shadow, this is flipped – if the enemy is named, having the
shadow hit so that you can assist or immediately start casting will
absorb the enemy’s damage while allowing you to deal your own. This is
more challenging if the enemy is not named (and hence cannot be targeted
directly by your shadow) or is simply faster than you. At this point,
the warg strategies (without blind and with less hitting power) apply. A
small but relevant point to end on is spell casting speed. Quick spells,
obviously, are fastest – at a lower spell level and 50% more mana. Quick
is sometimes overkill where casting fast is effective, doing more damage
and costing less, especially if using spells like shock against enemies
that are using colour spray or dispel evil. It’s also a healthy middle
ground for landing harms at a lower mana cost.

**Examples:**

- Quake chaos without weapon skills:
  [1](http://elvenrunes.com/cgi-bin/logs/secure/log_65927,79853_start_10_omode__typ_pk_show.m)

<!-- -->

- Black breath in action:
  [2](http://elvenrunes.com/cgi-bin/logs/secure/log_65846,10994_start_10_omode__typ_pk_show.m)

## Highlevel Extensions

As pure shamans get to high levels, you have a few choices:

- More ranger and warrior skills. While you might not want to get bash,
  you can improve your general weapon skill, parry, wilderness, or even
  leadership if you find yourself leading others around. As your level
  increases, your defense will become more robust, and so leaning into
  this can be effective. Alternatively, you could try to move away from
  pure shaman entirely and become a more middle-of-the-road bashing
  shaman with a wider set of spells.

<!-- -->

- Pick up more spells from the list of things you want to try out. There
  are always more spells than you can fit with the practices of one
  character.

<!-- -->

- Try out envenom: Like war shaman, you might want envenom to add
  additional tricks to your offensive power. If you happen to use black
  breath, pairing that with arachnia is an obvious move. Aim for 50%+.

Closing Outros are for elves, snaga.