---
title: "Slashing weapon"
permalink: "/Slashing_weapon/"
---

It is a falchion (satisfactory, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is poor while attacking and average while
defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts average damage upon
hitting. It weighs five pounds.

It is a scimitar (well-maintained, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is average while attacking and average while
defending; its speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon
hitting. It weighs four pounds.

It is a backsword (marred, new). This slashing weapon can be wielded
one-handed. It is poor while attacking and average while defending; its
speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs
three pounds.

It is a broadsword (satisfactory, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is awful while attacking and good while
defending; its speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon
hitting. It weighs four pounds.

It is a longsword (marred, new). This slashing weapon can be wielded
one-handed. It is average while attacking and average while defending;
its speed is slow, and it inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs
five pounds.

It is a jagged-edged scimitar (used, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is good while attacking and average while
defending; its speed is average, and it inflicts average damage upon
hitting. It weighs five pounds.

It is a sabre (satisfactory, new). This slashing weapon can be wielded
one-handed. It is average while attacking and average while defending;
its speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon hitting. It
weighs a couple of pounds.

It is a bastard sword (well-maintained, new). This slashing weapon can
be wielded either one- or two-handed. It is poor while attacking and
average while defending; its speed is very slow, and it inflicts average
damage upon hitting. It weighs six pounds.

It is a cutlass (worn, new). This slashing weapon can be wielded
one-handed. It is poor while attacking and average while defending; its
speed is average, and it inflicts very little damage upon hitting. It
weighs three pounds.

It is a sickle (worn, new). This slashing weapon can be wielded
one-handed. It is poor while attacking and poor while defending; its
speed is average, and it inflicts very little damage upon hitting. It
weighs a couple of pounds.

It is a sharp talon (neglected, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is awful while attacking and average while
defending; its speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon
hitting. It weighs a couple of pounds.

It is a broad scimitar (satisfactory, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is average while attacking and poor while
defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts average damage upon
hitting. It weighs six pounds.

It is a broad-bladed knife (well-maintained, new). This slashing weapon
can be wielded one-handed. It is awful while attacking and poor while
defending; its speed is fast, and it inflicts very little damage upon
hitting. It weighs a few ounces.

It is a Beorning sword (marred, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is average while attacking and average while
defending; its speed is average, and it inflicts little damage upon
hitting. It weighs three pounds.

It is a serrated scimitar (flawless, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is poor while attacking and average while
defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts average damage upon
hitting. It weighs five pounds.

It is a dark broadsword (marred, new). This slashing weapon can be
wielded one-handed. It is average while attacking and excellent while
defending; its speed is fast, and it inflicts little damage upon
hitting. It weighs three pounds.