---
title: "Stabbing weapon"
---

# Offensive

## giant spear

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is good while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
considerable damage upon hitting. It weighs six pounds.

## steel-tipped spear

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is average while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
average damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.

## pike

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is average while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
little damage upon hitting. It weighs four pounds.

## longspear

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is average while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
little damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.

# Defensive

## elven hunting-spear

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is poor while
attacking and average while defending; its speed is slow, and it
inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.

## steel-shafted spear

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is awful while
attacking and average while defending; its speed is slow, and it
inflicts average damage upon hitting. It weighs four pounds.

# Average

==short spear= This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is
awful while attacking and average while defending; its speed is average,
and it inflicts little damage upon hitting. It weighs a couple of
pounds.

## broad spear

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is poor while
attacking and poor while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
little damage upon hitting. It weighs four pounds.

## pitchfork

This stabbing weapon can be wielded one-handed. It is awful while
attacking and awful while defending; its speed is slow, and it inflicts
little damage upon hitting. It weighs three pounds.