---
title: Waterways
tags: ["Help files"]
---
[Arda](Arda "wikilink") has a number of rivers, streams and other
**bodies of water** that can be traveled upon if the proper
[equipment](equipment "wikilink") or [skills](skill "wikilink") are
available. Some of the waterways can be slow, others can have the water
rushing so fast that the water drags travelers along with it. Travel on
many of the bodies of water is safe if the traveler watches for rapids
to portage around and keeps a close watch to avoid dangerous waterfalls.
Travel beside water can be full of hazards if you are not prepared since
falling off a cliff into a river is possible.

Travel in the winter and you will frequently see bodies of water
freezing over with ice so that you can walk across them. However if you
are standing on ice and it melts you could find yourself swimming for
your life if you have not taken the precautions you would at other times
of the year. The following is meant for when no ice exists and walking
is impossible.

Most of the watery areas bigger than a small pond are one of three
types: shallow water, deep water, and the most interesting of all,
places totally underwater.

Of the three the easiest ones to cross is shallow water. Shallow water
is water that any [race](race "wikilink") can wade across without use of
equipment or a skill. Fords across deep rivers are sections where the
water has become shallow enough to wade or in some places to
[ride](ride "wikilink") across.

Deep water makes up the majority of major rivers and other large bodies
of water. While [ferries](ferry "wikilink") or bridges exist along some
of the major routes, less travelled routes can only be crossed by
[swimming](swim "wikilink"), or using a small [craft](boat "wikilink")
such as a [raft](raft "wikilink"),
[boat](light_boat_of_reeds "wikilink"), or [canoe](canoe "wikilink").
Small craft like this can be bought and sold from shops near major
cities or bodies of water. [Rangers](Ranger "wikilink") at a ranger
guild will also offer lessons in how to swim to those interested. Rapids
can prevent the use of boats, allowing only swimmers to enter the area
of white water.

Finally, underwater areas can be quite dangerous because of the need
that intelligent races have for air. Only highly skilled swimmers should
attempt to swim into these places even though the rewards might be
great. Provided you stay close to the surface, there are ways to prolong
your safe stay underwater.

See also: [Swim](Swim "wikilink"), [Drowning](Drowning "wikilink"),
[Ferry](Ferry "wikilink")
