---
title: Weapon
---

**MUME Weaponry**

Types of weaponry in MUME are: missile, piercing, charging, cleaving,
concussion, slashing, stabbing, and smiting (two-handed).

*Missile Weapons* - Bows, slings, and the like. Mostly used by thieves,
though works quite well for cleric with blind. Need about 12 strength
for the bigger ones. Good choices are embellished longbow, crossbow (not
light crossbow), and black horn shortbow. Embellished and crossbow are
very damaging, but slow (esp. crossbow), and black horn shortbow is very
fast. Yew longbow and orkish/elven shortbow aren't too bad either. Good
ammunition are ash arrows (accurate), war arrows (damaging), fletched
arrows (even more damaging), and silver-tipped arrows (light and painful
to undead) for bows and metal-cased bolts for crossbows.

*Piercing Weapons* - Daggers and such. Mostly thieves use. Low strength
requirement generally. Good choices are black runed dagger (good damage,
some parry, good ob, and spellsave; best non-artifact), nasty orkish
fang (damaging), enchanted double-edged eket (decent damage, some
parry), ceremonial dagger (highest pb of piercers), and enchanted sharp
thorn (same as eket, but damaging to undead).

*Charging Weapons* - Lances. Charge is a terrible skill. You should
avoid it. If you decide to try it anyway... are eff vs. riding.
Steel-tipped lance is better than lance in every way.

*Cleaving Weapons* - Axes and the like. Really nice on dwarves, thanks
to the ob bonus. Almost all are eff vs. wood. Mostly fairly high
strength requirements. Good choices are mighty dwarven axe (damage),
blackened dwarven axe (good vs. undead), brutal cleaver (good substitute
if you can't get your hands on either of those), double-headed axe (high
ob). Battle axe is decent if enchanted, but those others are much
better.

*Concussion Weapons* - Hammers and clubs. Nice damage to opponents in
metal armour. Need high strength. Ornate warhammer is best non-artifact.
Heavy morningstar is good too if enchanted. Engraved warhammer's pretty
nice as well.

*Slashing Weapons* - Mostly swords. Tend to have good pb. Usually
moderate strength requirement. Good choices are steel claymore (damaging
and good ob, but need a fair bit of strength), broad scimitar (not quite
as good as claymore), engraved broadsword (really nice pb), Dunadan
blade (high ob and a bit of pb, good only), Wightblade (darkie's version
of Dunadan), fell blade (decently damaging and still pretty fast),
enchanted longsword (if can't get some nicer offensive blade), enchanted
broadsword (if can't get better defensive blade), dark broadsword (if
evil, not as damaging as ebs but just as good defensively).

*Stabbing Weapons* - Spears. Eff vs. riding. Moderate to high strength
requirement. Attackers might be kept at bay and take damage. Good
choices include steel-shafted spear (decent damage and no pb penalty),
blackened spear (high ob), orkish battle-standard (decent pb), enchanted
steel-tipped spear (decent substitute for blackened), giant spear
(highest dam/hit).

*Two-Handed Weapons* - Very high strength requirement. Can't wear
shield, can only wear bucklers (wooden/metal target shield, small wooden
target shield, buckler), but high high damage. Good choices are warsword
(high ob, no pb penalty, highest dam), black metal staff (high pb),
enchanted heavy warhammer (eff vs. metaled opponents last I checked),
enchanted two-handed axe (eff vs. wood, still not bad), enchanted
two-handed sword (higher ob than axe or hammer).

Of course, there are artifacts out there that are even more powerful
than the best stuff listed here. However, there's only one copy of each,
so it's pretty unlikely you'll get your hands on them unless you're a
powerplayer. If you do get an artifact that's of your type of weaponry,
it's probably better than anything you've got.