---
title: Zaugurz Orc
tags:
  - Playable races
---
The **Uruk-Zaugurz** is a tribe on the rise from far north in the [Misty
Mountains](Misty_Mountains "wikilink"). Hardened by cold from their home
in the freezing caves of northern Misty's, the Zaugurz have come to wage
war and claim loot for the tribes expanding territory. The Zaugurz
hoards stops for nothing and wages war upon every living creature. Not
long ago the Uruk-Zaugurz and the [Uruk-Tarkhnarb](orc "wikilink")
tribes were allies, but after a sneak attack on Goblin Gate one night,
resulting in chaos, mayhem and rivers and blood, the alliance crumbled,
most likely forever. When the Tarkhnarbs finally regained control over
their caves, the Great Goblins ten best breeding females had all been
captured, not to mention the hoards of treasures now collecting dust up
north instead. After this incident the Tarkhnarb and all their allies
are sworn enemies of the Uruk-Zaugurz and vice versa. Since the Zaugurz
have rejected all allies no [wargs](warg "wikilink") can be used as
[mounts](mount "wikilink"), a treat other Orcs can enjoy, whilst the
Zaugurz soldier is forced to run on his feet.

After the treacherous ambush on Goblin Gate the Zaugurz built a small
outpost northwest of the Tarkhnarbs' home cave. The Outpost has no real
defence worth mentioning, yet the hostile climate surrounding it and the
iron will of the Zaugurz forces have kept it well protected from
enemies.

## Zaugurz in [MUME](MUME "wikilink")

The Zaugurz Outpost does not only offer poor protection, there are also
no stores, only a blacksmith sent from up north to mend basic kind of
[weapons](weapon "wikilink") and [armour](armour "wikilink") for the
cause. On the positive side the [rent](rent "wikilink") cost for the
Zaugurz is close to free. Furthermore there are only two paths of
profession available for the Zaugurz orc, the insidious and agile way of
the [scout](thief "wikilink") and the pure brute force of the
[Warrior](Warrior "wikilink"). There is also a possibility to train
ranger skills in the Zaugurz caves, but there is no possibility to
master [magic](magic "wikilink") as Zaugurz. No Master of Black Magic
seems willing to teach the Zaugurz tribe magic, rendering the usage of
[Mana](Mana "wikilink") obsolete, thus Zaugurz have no Mana points.

Eventhough the life of the Zaugurz hero is hard, considering the various
maluses mentioned above, they still stand strong and bloodthirsty, never
turning down a chance to prove their worth in battle, or to just
overwhelm the enemy by numbers or by cunning plans. A well spread
tendency among the Zaugurz tribe is their predilection for lurking in
the shadows, sneaking and hiding, which partly can be explained by their
poor possibility to lick their wounds in the safety of towns or caves,
making them independent renegades who can't rely for their tribe far
north to offer them a safe haven for healing or recreation.

## Further Information

- [Zaugurz_orc_guide](Zaugurz_orc_guide "wikilink")
- [mumeresource.wordpress.com](https://mumeresource.wordpress.com/guides/zaugurz/)
  External Zaugurz Info page

{% include ClassRace.md %}
